track 1
Introduction to Doctrinal Summaries


We are looking at introduction to doctrinal summaries. Don't worry about the title, it may sound weird, but you are going to catch on as we make progress.


I'm going to start with Ephesians chapter 1 and 13. Essentially what we are looking at in this teaching is what happens after you have received salvation and God's purpose. You have heard the truth of the gospel, you are now saved. When you are saved, the Bible tells us you have received the spirit of God. And when you have received the spirit of God, you are now in God's purpose. At that point you are excited, I'm saved, I'm in God's purpose, what is supposed to happen next? What happens next after this? Because at the point that I'm in God's purpose, my greatest desire now is I want to fulfill it. I want to get this done. Let's read Ephesians 1:13 so that at least we start with a Bible text then I'll say some other things I want to say. You have received salvation, you have received God's purpose. What happens right after that?


Ephesians 1:13 says, "In him you also trusted after you heard the word of truth." So you believed the gospel. You heard the word of truth. And it calls the word of truth the gospel of your salvation, "in whom also having believed you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise." At the point where you believed the gospel, which is the word of truth, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. Remember that that Spirit that we received at salvation is called the Spirit of Sonship, Romans 8 and in verse 15. And also remember that Ephesians 1 says Sonship is God's purpose. At the point where you receive salvation you receive the Spirit and the very Spirit that you receive is the Spirit of his purpose. You receive the Spirit of Sonship. I want to look at Ephesians chapter 1 and in verse 9. The Spirit that you receive is the Spirit of his purpose, the Spirit of Sonship. So at salvation you are set into God's purpose. There is no question about that. You are set into God's purpose.


Ephesians 1 and in verse 9: "Having made known unto us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself." Do you notice that he says God has made known the mystery of his will, what he wants, according to his good pleasure, what he likes, which is what he purposed in himself. What did God purpose in himself? What did he determine in himself to have? It is what he likes that he wants. As you are seated here there are things that you just like ordinarily. Someone tells you, "I'm making pruncacas." You're like, "Really?" Because you like it already. So you like it dormantly, if you may say so. There's that point where you might be craving it. You want it. But you might kind of ignore it. Or you might crave it and you are like, "I'm going to go get it." Using that kind of an idea from the human standpoint to describe God's purpose, what we call his purpose begins with what he likes ordinarily. Then what he wants, the desires or craves to have, and becomes what he is determined to have is his purpose. Whatever we find out he likes that he wants is what his purpose also is. Ephesians 1:5 tells us that thing that he likes that he wants that he happened to purpose in himself. Ephesians 1:5, "having predestined us to adoption as sons." The Greek word there is the word huiothesia and huiothesia simply means the placement as a son, the state of being a son which we can simply call sonship. So he has predestined us to sonship by Jesus Christ to himself. If he predestined us to sonship it means sonship was something that was already an idea on his heart. Then he brought you back to it by Jesus Christ to himself, why? He says according to the good pleasure of his will, implying that the reason why he predestined you was because of the good pleasure of his will. Therefore what he predestined you to is that good pleasure of his will. He said he predestined you according to the good pleasure of his will. Whatever he predestined you to is that good pleasure of his will. So he's invariably telling us in Ephesians 1:5 that sonship is the good pleasure of his will. Sonship is that thing that he likes that he also wants. Sonship is that thing that God likes that he wants, which is also what he purposed in himself.
05:00
I don't want us to go there because for you to be here in this teaching at this stage you already know that. We are in level two so you already understand that you are saved. You already understand that you are saved because you believe the truth of the gospel. You already understand that you have the spirit of sonship. And that spirit of sonship is the spirit of his purpose. The big question is, I believe the gospel, I have received God's purpose, what am I supposed to do now that I have received God's purpose? What am I supposed to do next? It's common sense, when you receive God's purpose your desire is to fulfill God's purpose. I want to get it done. I want to fulfill this will of God for my life. If you are like Jesus, he said in John chapter 4:34 that my meat is to do the will of him that sent me and to finish it. So your desire is I want to fulfill it. I want to finish this purpose. Like Paul as well in 2 Timothy chapter 4 and verse 7, he said that I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. So there is the purpose of God for our life that we have entered into at salvation and our next desire is to fulfill that purpose of God for my life.


What is next at that point? What am I supposed to do to fulfill God's purpose? Some will just think, I'll start taking actions. I'll start taking initiatives. I'll start getting busy. I'll start doing things. But that's making a mistake. Let me use an illustration right now. It's like saying someone tells you that your purpose is to carry three bags of cement at once from here to a 200 meter distance. If someone tells you that's your purpose, you need to carry something that heavy from one point to another, and you look at yourself, you are like, I can't do it. It means that the first thing when you find out your purpose and you want to fulfill it is to put yourself in the state to bring yourself to the point in growth that you are able to fulfill that purpose. It implies that the next thing after receiving God's purpose is growth. To develop yourself, to build yourself, to grow to such a point that you can fulfill the assignment that has been given to you.


If we are going to fulfill God's purpose, what we need first is growth. What follows right after receiving God's purpose, the first thing that we need is growth. How do we know this to be the case? It's what the Lord Jesus himself said. The moment you have received salvation, the moment you have believed the gospel, the moment you have received my purpose, the first thing you need is the training, the development, the growth that will make you able to fulfill my purpose. Look at the last words of the Lord Jesus. I'll read Mark's account then I'll read Matthew's account. When he died and rose again from the dead, what did he say? Mark chapter 16 and in verse 15. And he said to them, "Go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature." Anyone that is obeying the mandate of the gospel is looking for every means to preach the gospel to every creature. Go into all the world and preach, publicize, announce the gospel to every creature. He that believes, baptized, will be saved. He that believes not will be damned. Faith in the gospel. He said go and preach that message to every creature. But is that the only thing Jesus said when he was going? No. That's one part of it. Look at the second part of what he said to do. Matthew and in chapter 28 and verse 18. Jesus came and spoke to them saying, "All authority is given to me in heaven and on earth. Go therefore." I've accomplished the victory of life over death. I've accomplished the victory of life over darkness. Now I'm sending you forth in the light of that not only to save people. So of course the first thing you are supposed to do, people are under the reign of death and darkness, bring them out of that into light. But that's not all. "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations." If you are using KJV you see go and teach all nations. But that word there teach in the Greek, which is what Matthew wrote in, is the word matheteuo. Didasko is teach. Matheteuo there is make disciples, is the verb from the noun disciple, mathetes. You can put it another way. You can simply say go and disciple all nations. You are using disciple as a verb there. To make it clearer as a verb you can say go and make disciples of all nations. And how did he say you're going to disciple all nations? He says number one, baptizing them into the name of the Father, Son, Holy Ghost, which is salvation. You get them to believe the gospel to now be part of the family of God. The very first step in discipling all nations is preaching to them unto faith that puts them in the body of Christ. Go and disciple all nations by getting them saved.
10:00
Getting them baptized into the family of God. What are you going to do after that? Baptize them into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost and then he says "teaching them." Do you notice that? After their salvation there is still work. The mandate of the Lord Jesus when he died and rose again from the dead did not stop at go and get people saved. The mission that he gave us did not stop at go and get people saved. It goes further to teach them. If you say Jesus died and rose just so that people will be saved, that's what really matters just their salvation, you are wrong. Something else matters to him. There is something else he wants for them. And if you ask this question, why does he want them to be discipled? That's a very good question. Because they are already saved. Discipleship is not going to get them saved. It's not even keeping them saved. So what is the discipleship for? You are asking a very good question because you are asking why did Jesus die and rise again. The answer to the question why did Jesus die and rise again is not just forgiveness of sins. The answer to the question why did Jesus die and rise again is why did God make us. God did not make us to save us. If God made us to save us, that's a bad person. That means he made you to be in a problem to now save you to get glory out of it. He made us with his purpose. Something went wrong that he now has to save us from. When God made man at the beginning he didn't say, now I've made you I'm going to save you. He didn't even mention the word save. He said receive life, receive my purpose. It is the rejection of that that brought the need of salvation. The contradiction that we now witness in the world from which we have been saved by believing the gospel is a contradiction as a result of the rejection of God's purpose.


When you are saved and you have received God's purpose what follows after that is now discipleship. Discipleship for what reason? To be saved? No, you are already saved. Discipleship is for the reason that he made you which is his purpose. When you have received salvation and have entered into God's purpose, you need to grow to be able to fulfill that purpose. We can say it another way, you need to be discipled. Because it's by discipleship that you grow to fulfill God's purpose. You need to grow, you need to be discipled. What follows after salvation is discipleship so that you can fulfill purpose. That's why the apostles, after people got saved, didn't leave them to themselves. They discipled them to get them to walk in and fulfill God's purpose for their life. Let's see Acts chapter 2 and verse 40. "And with many other words he testified and exhorted them," the people that gathered on the day of Pentecost in Acts 2. He testified and exhorted them saying, "Be saved from this perverse generation." Now look at verse 41. "Then those who gladly received his word were baptized; and that day about three thousand souls were added to them." Simply put, they got saved. They believed the gospel and they got saved. Now look at verse 42. "And they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine." They didn't get saved and say, "Thank you for saving me, thank you my Lord," and then they left. Rather, immediately they got saved and they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and in fellowship and in breaking of bread and in prayers. Immediately after salvation what followed was discipleship. They continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine. Doctrine just means teaching. It implies that they were doing Matthew chapter 28 to them. He says, "teaching them to observe." The very word doctrine, didache, is related to the very word we saw to teach, didasko. So they continued the apostles' teaching. It shows us that there is a definite doctrine that they had. They continued in what the apostles were teaching. Definite. And I'll come back to that fact that it must be definite. When discipleship is happening you are being trained so that you can have growth to do something.


Let's see a very important text on discipleship. Jesus says, after you have been saved and have received my purpose, what you need is discipleship to fulfill my purpose. You are saved, you are in God's purpose. You are a son of God. You have sonship. You are an heir of God. You have a natural assignment, you have a spiritual assignment. You have all these things that the Lord has given to you to do. He's going to ask of you at the end. You need discipleship to fulfill that purpose. A very important text on discipleship is Luke chapter 6 and verse 39 and 40.
15:00
Luke 6:39 and 40. Now is the Lord Jesus speaking here. "He spoke a parable to them saying, can the blind lead the blind? Will they not both fall into the ditch? A disciple cannot be above his teacher. But he that is perfectly trained will be as his master." I want you to notice something there, that he's saying that in a discipleship relationship you are meant to be perfectly trained and become as the master. Do you see that there's a goal in discipleship? He said you can't be more than the master, but when you are perfectly trained you will be as the master, implying that discipleship has this goal where you are meant to be or become as the master. But then he showed us the process that it takes to be as the master. Who will be as the master? He that is perfectly trained is the one that will become as the master. It doesn't happen magically. It doesn't happen by just laying hands. It doesn't happen by just wishing it. It doesn't happen by just hoping it. He said it is when you have been perfectly trained that you become as the master.


This is where we are getting further into the teaching. Let me quickly remind us before we move a step further. The first thing we said is right after salvation and receiving God's purpose, our biggest desire is we want to fulfill God's purpose. But for someone to fulfill any assignment there must first be the ability and the capacity. Of course we already have the ability as a new creation. But there must be the capacity, the growth to be able to do it. They say carry that cement from here to here, looking at it you say I can't do it, let me go and train and then I'll be able to do it. You gym, you are built, maybe they say you must do it once, you must not drop it. You know you are not ready, maybe you need two weeks. Then you gym, you build yourself, and when you come back you are then able to carry it easily and do it without stress. Not the one that you try to carry it and you're going on the way, you just fall down and they say what killed him? He was trying to fulfill purpose. No, sometimes people are trying to bear burdens for things that they have not received training for. They are trying to bear burdens for things that they have not grown to be able to do. That's not how God works. God's major concern right after your salvation is your growth. You notice 1st Peter chapter 2 and verse 1 and 2. He says, "laying aside all malice, hypocrisy, envy, and evil speaking, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby." That's the first thing, you need to grow. God didn't say now the next thing is that you must first go and do this. No, you need to grow. It's the growth that makes you able to carry out that purpose, to bear the burden of it. And that growth comes by discipleship. That growth comes by discipleship. And it's explained that discipleship has a goal. You want to become as the master. So the growth itself has a goal. Of course purpose has its own goal. But growth has its goal. Remember, let's use our illustration again. They gave you an assignment, you must carry those bags of cement from here to that place. That is the purpose. But you look at yourself, you need to grow to the point that you are so-so pounds, it's about the muscle. You need to grow to the point that you are fit in such and such a manner. The growth itself has a goal, even though the purpose has a goal. You can fulfill the growth goal and not fulfill the purpose goal. But you cannot fulfill the purpose goal without the growth goal. If you try to bear that burden the way it's required of you without having that growth, you're going to fail. But you got to fulfill the growth goal to be able to fulfill the purpose goal. And it tells us that discipleship is how we grow. Luke 6, discipleship is how we grow. The disciple cannot be more than his master, but when the disciple is perfectly trained he would be as his master. That means your greatest concern now needs to be, what is this perfect training that will make me as the master so that by that I can now fulfill God's purpose? Our desire must be to find out what is this perfect training that will make me as the master. Let me tell you the word that was used there when he says "he that is perfectly trained."
20:00
That word in the Greek is the word katartizo. Very important word. "He that is katartizo," he that is perfectly trained, "will be as the master." So you need discipleship and that discipleship needs to do katartizo to you to make you as the master. Let me spell it: k-a-t-a-r-t-i-z-o. It's from two words. We have the word kata, that means down. Down at the base, like this floor is down, it is what is under us. It can also mean downwards, particularly when it's serving as a prefix. Then you have the second word artios. Artios just means a completion point. The word artios is a point, and it usually refers to a completion point. If someone says go down to that point and get so-and-so for me, that point the person is telling you to go to is artios. Go to that particular place. Go down there and get so-and-so for me. That point is the artios, the completion point. Or we are running a race. The first to get to this point wins the race. That point, the completion of the race, is artios.


Let's use another example. Let's say they tell everyone we are meeting at a certain place for today's meeting. You realize that many people will be coming from different places. And all of you must get to the same point. This one is not even a competition, it's just that we must all arrive at the same point. Some people are coming from a farther distance than others. Some people can just step out and they have gotten there. Some people are coming from different points. Different strokes for different folks, different people coming from different points but all headed to the same place. Imagine you are supposed to become as the master, some people will be a further distance from being like the master than others. The goal we are trying to get to, all of us will not be coming to that goal from the same place. We will be coming to that goal from different places. Certain people have certain tendencies, weaknesses, issues, troubles, challenges, inclinations that they are coming from. Other people have other ones. But yet everybody is headed to the same destination, to the same point. That is discipleship.


Discipleship originally means being an apprentice. If you are going to train someone, people sign up to be an apprentice in a particular place, you have the goal that all of them must become like this. But some of them already have certain inclinations on that skill. And their journey may be faster than others. It doesn't change the fact that it's your duty to ensure that by the curriculum that you have, you are supposed to bring all of them to that point. You are meant to bring every single person, no matter where they are coming from, to the same destination. That is discipleship, which is what the Lord says you need. There's a point all of us must be at to fulfill purpose. There is the required training, perfect training, that is required to bring us there. Let me show you some instances where this word katartizo is used so that you can realize how important it is. See 1st Corinthians chapter 1 and verse 10. You are saved. You have received God's purpose. Now you need to fulfill purpose, you need discipleship and its perfecting. You need discipleship and its perfecting. Discipleship has its perfecting that it must do in your life. It must bring you to this point.
25:00
1 Corinthians chapter 1 and verse 10. Paul here says, "Now I plead with you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment." That word perfectly joined together is the word katartizo. He's saying, I'm hearing that you guys are believing different things. Some people in Corinth are saying A. On the same matter, some other people are saying B. Some other people are saying C. It's like, what's going on? All of you are meant to say the same things about this matter. Why are you saying different things about the same matter? Everybody has their own opinion. Someone says, well we are already a new creation, another person says, well we are a new creation but there's still the flesh inside us so they are fighting, we have to try our best. What are you saying different things for? He said, I want all of you to be perfectly joined together in the same mind. I want all of you to go down to the same point in your mind. To arrive at the same mind. To be joined in the same mind. Everybody should go to the same mind.


The major text I want to show you in this regard that's going to get us into what we are looking at is Ephesians chapter 4 and verse 11. Upon salvation, as well as God's purpose, the Lord wants us to be discipled because of his purpose. Ephesians 4 and verse 11: "And He Himself gave some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers." The "He Himself" in Ephesians 4:11 is talking about the Lord Jesus. You can read the earlier text to see it is talking about the Lord Jesus, he is the one who descended and then ascended far above all the heavens. And then after his death and resurrection, he gave the apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers. We can simply say the Lord Jesus gave the leaders of the church. Right after the death, burial, and resurrection of the Lord Jesus, he gave the leaders of the church. But remember we have already read that account, when he gave them, he gave them to do what? He gave them to go and make disciples. When he gave the leaders of the church, he gave them to make disciples. We must not forget that. Look at Ephesians 4, what did he say he gave them for? He says he gave the leaders of the church, apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, for the perfecting of the saints. If you are using KJV it says "for the equipping of the saints." It is the same thing, the word there is the word katartismos. He gave them for the katartismos. Katartismos there is the noun of katartizo. It's like saying examine, examination in English. He gave them for the perfecting of the saints.


What Paul is saying in Ephesians 4, is it exactly what the Lord Jesus did in Matthew 28? Yes. What Paul is saying in Ephesians 4:11 downwards is what the Lord Jesus did in Matthew 28. He gave them to make disciples and Luke 6 told us that making disciples means they are going to be perfected to become as the master. Ephesians 4 is now saying he gave them for the perfecting of the saints. Ephesians 4 is going very direct. He's not going round corners, he's not beating about the bush. He's going very direct, he gave them for the perfecting of the saints, he gave them to bring the saints down to a particular point, katartismos, bring them down to the artios. At this point it means that we are seeing upon salvation we have two goals. There is the goal of purpose, but there is the goal of growth or the goal of discipleship. I need to get to the point in growth that will make me able to fulfill purpose. I need to get to that point in discipleship that makes me able to fulfill purpose.
30:00
We are therefore dealing with two goals in our lives. Brothers and sisters, you have God's purpose to fulfill. But to fulfill God's purpose, you have to grow. You have to be discipled. You have to be perfected as a saint. You need to get to the point in growth that God wants you to get to. You need to have the requisite development that God wants you to have that makes you able to fulfill his purpose. Otherwise you are not going to be able to do what the Lord wants you to do. It's true that you desire to fulfill his purpose. But it's critical that you receive the training, the development, the discipleship, the perfecting, the growth that makes you able to fulfill that purpose. And that's what our focus is, introduction to doctrinal summaries. What is required in discipleship, in this perfecting, for you to get to that point in growth that makes you able to fulfill purpose? What is required? We'll see Paul tell us here in Ephesians 4. And when we see it, we will now know why we need doctrinal summaries. When we see this is what I need for the growth that will make me fulfill God's purpose, then you'll be able to value and appreciate doctrinal summaries. It's in appreciating doctrinal summaries that you'll be able to get a further expounding on those summaries to have the complete knowledge you should have. You need to have the summaries themselves to know that this is what I need to know before you start filling in the gaps with the different other questions within those summaries.


Look at Ephesians 4:12 again, he gave the leaders of the church for the perfecting of the saints. Remember, perfecting means they are to bring you down to a particular point. In Luke chapter 6 and verse 40, what's the point they are to bring you to? He that is perfectly trained will become as the master. So the point they are bringing you to is the master. But in this text, the point we are to be brought to is mentioned in Ephesians 4:13. Ephesians 4:13, let's look at it. What does it say? "Till we all come to the unity of the faith." Do you notice that statement "till we all come to" is a statement for a journey. I'll keep moving, you will keep moving on this road till you get to this point. He's saying you are to be perfected till you come to. He's about to show you what the destination is. "Till we come to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ." Brothers and sisters, he is describing one destination. They are meant to perfect us till we get to a point. Katartismos. But he describes that one destination in four ways. Till we come to the unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God, perfect man, measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Now look at the description he gave, four descriptions. Notice the last two descriptions. The first one says "perfect man." It is describing the state of a person. This is a complete human. That means the person is completely developed. And the next one explains it to you. "The measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ." Stature means there's a point in growth. The stature someone has when the person is just born is not the stature the person should have by five, by ten, by fifteen. The stature of the person is developing until full adulthood. He's saying there's a stature that he wants us to get to. Till we all come to the perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
35:00
But that's what the last two descriptions show us, the perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. The first two descriptions say "till we come to the unity of the faith." That one is not describing a man's state, that one is describing knowledge. "Till we come to the unity of the faith." Faith is a message believed. Ordinarily faith is the act of believing, but faith can be used for what is believed. Those guys received the faith. You have changed the use of faith from the act to that which is believed. It is in that sense he is using faith here when he says unity of the faith. Those guys received the faith, but notice the qualifier, unity of, which is to say the wholesome message. So "till we come to the wholesome message," then he goes further and he says, "and of the knowledge of the Son of God." Till we come to the unity of the faith, the knowledge of the Son of God. We can say very definitely that the first two descriptions of the destination that we need to get to is describing knowledge. Faith, knowledge. The last two is describing a stature of a person, that is something that looks almost physical, but in a spiritual sense. The stature of a person. The first two is knowledge, the last two is stature. They are not the same. They are not the same. What I mean when I say they are not the same is that it is possible for someone to know and not to have the stature of what he knows. Yes. It's possible for someone to know but lack the stature of what he knows. Do you agree? If you disagree, then you need to go and read James, where James is going to talk about the fact that there are people that are hearers of the word, they have actually heard it and they agree, but they are not doers. If you disagree, you need to read Paul in Romans 6, where he's going to say that you already know this, what's your problem, but he now says you still need to do something so that you can walk in it, you need to reckon. The state of your growth is a different ballgame from the state of your knowledge, yet together they will make up your growth. The state of your stature together make up your growth. I prefer to call the latter one growth, because that's the real issue. But your knowledge is the prerequisite for that. Let me just give you a summary, we have looked at this in level one, that you need to receive knowledge and then have a faith stand on that knowledge. That faith stand on that knowledge is what gives you consciousness. That consciousness is the state of your growth. The knowledge is not the state of your growth. The strength of your consciousness, your reckoning, the strength of your faith, your reckoning, your consciousness is the state of your stature, the state of your growth. Why is that person not doing this and that? The person knows it, why is he not doing it? Because it's not knowledge that makes you do, it is your reckoning, your consciousness that makes you do. Your reckoning that makes you do. But remember, what are you going to reckon? What are you going to stand on in your faith stand? Knowledge. So knowledge is primary. Knowledge is the prerequisite. For standard, as you read in this text, till we complete this destination, he put the knowledge first. Your stature, your consciousness, your practical walk in what God wants for you is a function of the knowledge that you have.
40:00
The consciousness you have is a function of the knowledge that you have. We have gone round and arrived at this destination. Let's quickly recap again. After salvation, receiving God's purpose, all of us desire to fulfill God's purpose. But we need something. What do we need? We need growth to be able to fulfill it. That growth can only come by discipleship. Discipleship has a destination to be like the master. It requires the process of perfecting. That perfecting, katartismos, means they must bring you to a point. We are seeing that that point is a point in knowledge and in stature or growth. The real issue is you must receive that knowledge so that by faith you can bring yourself to that stature. If I am going to grow after salvation, what I need is knowledge. What did Jesus tell them? Disciple them by teaching them. That means you must communicate knowledge so that they can stand by faith on it to the end that they are now mature, they have that stature to be able to walk in my purpose. Knowledge is the very first thing in growth. Knowledge in fact is what defines everything in growth because the consciousness you have is a consciousness of the knowledge that you have. The consciousness that you have is a function of the knowledge that you have.


At this juncture of your life, with everything we have said, what is the most important thing you need now? Knowledge. You already know that your faith stand will be your response to the knowledge. You will respond by faith to that knowledge, and then when you do, you will have that growth that will make you fulfill God's purpose. But if you don't have the right knowledge itself, whatever you think you are growing in will be a problem that will eventually affect your walking and fulfillment of purpose. So the one thing I cannot afford to toy with is what precisely that knowledge is. I cannot afford to toy with what precisely that knowledge is. Paul here calls that knowledge "unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God." He said that's what they are teaching, the apostles. At this point we must be concerned. Paul, we want to know this knowledge. The apostles' doctrine, you said all of this is what you are teaching, tell us what it is. And he does tell us what it is. In Ephesians chapter 2 downwards, he tells us, this is that knowledge. I'm going to tell you now, that's what Paul says. I will tell you exactly what that knowledge is. Ephesians chapter 2. And when he tells it to us, I'm going to spell it out for us and that's going to bring us into our studies going forward in level two.


Ephesians chapter 2 and verse 19. Please pay very good attention. You have said there's this knowledge we need, you apostles, what is it exactly? Tell us, we need to know. Ephesians 2 and verse 19. "Now, therefore, you are no longer foreigners and strangers, but fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God." Why are we that? Verse 20, "having been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone." He's saying the message that we build you on, you got saved on this and you grow by that message, is the foundation of the apostles and prophets. That's the message that we gave to you. You are built fully.
45:00
"Having been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, in whom the whole building, being fitted together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord, in whom you also are being built together for a dwelling place of God in the Spirit." So we are built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets. And he calls that foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ. I want you to pay good attention here. We are built on this foundation of the apostles and prophets which he says is Jesus Christ. That is what we are built on. Wow. Amazing. We build on this foundation, this message that they gave us.


I want you to go further to Ephesians chapter 3 and verse 1, "For this reason I..." Remember the earlier one says you are built on the foundation of the apostles, plural, and prophets. But when we get to chapter 3 and verse 1, he is continuing what he's saying, "For this reason I..." He has moved from all of us are presenting this foundation that you are a part of and that you're getting built with. You got saved, you became joined to it and you are being developed, you are growing spiritually, all of us are part of it. But by the time he gets to chapter 3 and verse 1, he switches and says "For this reason I, Paul." You are going to see that it's very common for Paul to do that. He will say all of us are giving you this, yet there is a role that I have. Let's continue to read what he said. "For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you Gentiles—if indeed you have heard of the dispensation..." That word actually simply means management, the responsibility, management, stewardship. "of the grace of God which was given to me for you." So there was a grace of God given to him to manage, to steward. You know about the grace that has been given to steward for you. What is that grace about? "How that by revelation He made known to me the mystery (as I have briefly written already, by which, when you read, you may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ)." Notice how personal he's saying it. He has made known to me the mystery. When you read, you understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. I want you to notice verse 3 again. "how that by revelation He made known to me the mystery (as I have briefly written already)." What does that mean? I have summarized it. This is where we are saying doctrinal summaries. What is the summary of the doctrine that Paul gave? We want to examine it in a summary form before we examine it in its comprehensive form. Paul is saying, you have received from us an entire set of teachings, you can exhaust yourself going completely, but I, Paul, have this responsibility given to me by Christ where I have the wisdom for it, to have summarized this teaching. I have given you a summary of the truth so that it can be very easy for you to grab this point and from there build yourself upon it. He has given it in a summary form. He said, I have written it briefly earlier. Check what I've written earlier. You will be able to understand my knowledge in the mystery. What was earlier? Chapter one and two up to this point in chapter three. I have written it briefly, I have written it in a summary. An exhaustive summary is a document written that provides clarity without showing you all the completely detailed processes. It takes important details and places them together and gives you the summary.
50:00
Let's say I am writing something about myself for somebody to read so that they can know me, that process of writing it out is a biography. Now I can just make it my CV instead or a resume. What does it have? Just my summary. You don't have everything about my life written down completely. But with that summary, you know me clearly enough at a basic level to be able to have a standard to judge what is exactly right about me. A summary gives you all of that without having to put in all details. So a CV is a summary, your resume is a summary. The full scope, all that details, is the scriptures, it got details of all the processes. But these summaries are taken from that scripture, taking the specific details that are very important and presenting them. Paul is saying, I have presented a summary to you, briefly written down. I didn't write it long, I already briefly have given this summary of this doctrine.


Why is Paul doing this? This is a very interesting question. Why is he making this summary claim? He made a claim in Romans chapter 6 as well, verse 17: "But God be thanked that though you were slaves of sin, yet you obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine to which you were delivered." Look at the word form. He says "form of doctrine." You obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine. That word form is the word tupos in the Greek, which eventually is translated to type or pattern in English. You obeyed that pattern of doctrine. What do you do when you pattern your clothes? If I pattern from somebody's clothes, is it an exact process? It has the exact measurements and what it's going to do is create the exact same clothes by a process, but the pattern already gave you what it should look like. What Paul is saying is these guys have a pattern and they obeyed a form, a summary, something that defines how your understanding is shaped. Let's see some other places. 2 Timothy chapter 1 and verse 13. Paul was writing to Timothy and says, "Hold fast the pattern of sound words which you have heard from me, in faith and love which are in Christ Jesus." Hold fast the pattern, tupos. What pattern, this form. Paul is saying your knowledge, your growth, must have this form, it has a pattern, you must stick to this specific pattern.


Paul will make a very unique claim. All of us the apostles stand up to this pattern or summaries of putting it that I'm bringing out. Why? What gives you the right to be giving a summarized version of it? What gives him the right? Let me show you what gave him the right. 1 Corinthians chapter 3. Why is there a particular summary that Paul gives to us that forms our understanding? Look at 1 Corinthians chapter 3 and verse 10. "According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds on it." The grace that Paul had is the wisdom of the architect. Not that they didn't have the content of the message, but someone had the wisdom of the architect to rightly present that message. So Paul says, "According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation." The word master builder in the Greek is architekton. It's where we have the English word architect. Paul has the architect role in the presentation of the doctrine, even though every other apostle supplied the content of the same message.


It is also why in 1 Corinthians 15:1-8 he said "lastly he was seen by me also, as by one born out of due time." He had to be the last one to be added as a witness to the resurrection of Christ. He said, I have this wisdom to be an architect. By inspiration of the Spirit, taking all the content and giving us the exact structure of the building. This is why Peter is going to acknowledge him. 2 Peter chapter 3. Peter, who is the head of the family, still said, you got to listen to him. He's the one that has the wisdom for this. They knew the role that he had. See 2 Peter chapter 3. The same word wisdom that Paul used, they used that same word to describe him. He said he has that wisdom.
55:00
When Paul speaks in Ephesians chapter 3 and says, "I have briefly written in a few words," we need to find out his doctrinal summary. That's why I'm introducing you to "Introduction to Doctrinal Summaries." We are going to have other sessions within level two, which is ten sessions, to now do a summary on each point of what he taught in the doctrinal summary. The major comprehensive explanation is the major part of the doctrine, which is level five, and that will take some time. But you need to have the foundation right. Whatever gaps are left in the summary, you fill it when we get to level five. That's the complete discipleship outline, or the complete doctrinal outline.


So Ephesians 3:3-4 again, "how that by revelation He made known to me the mystery (as I have briefly written already, by which, when you read, you may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ)." We can say "which I have summarized." I have written it in a few words, I had to summarize, I had to quickly do it. And I want you to know it. He said, when you read, you will understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. I have written it before we got to this point, I wrote it in a few words. He's saying you should go back to the earlier chapters.


Before we go back and see what he said, I want to show you that this exclusive claim of Paul is not a faulty claim. It's not even a one-off claim. He makes that same claim in 1st Corinthians chapter 3. And it's not a careless claim. It's a claim that others will recognize about him as well. Let's just quickly do that before we come back and see what is the doctrinal summary Paul gave us. Look at 1st Corinthians chapter 3 and verse 10. "According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds on it." Notice he calls himself a wise master builder. The word master builder in Greek is architekton. It is the one who has the wisdom of the architect. It is the grace that Paul had. Not that the other apostles didn't have the content of the message, but someone had the wisdom of the architect to rightly present that message in its proper structure.


He was the one that was given wisdom for this. When Paul speaks in Ephesians chapter 3 and says I have briefly written in a few words, we need to find out his doctrinal summary. What is the summary of the doctrine that Paul gave? We want to examine it in a summary form before we examine it in its comprehensive form. You need to have the summaries themselves to know that this is what I need to know, before you even start filling in the gaps with the different other questions within those summaries.
60:00
When Paul was now talking to Timothy about this doctrine that he taught him, see what he told him. 1 Timothy 1:13. This doctrine we can see, "unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God," what we need to know to grow so that we can fulfill purpose is a conclusive knowledge. It's not something that someone says, "nobody can ever fully teach God's word," that is nonsense. You are supposed to teach God's word conclusively. People should know the exact scope of what you are about to teach. Even if you are doing individual teachings, exhortations here and there, it is not without the foundation that there is a complete scope of teaching. Our understanding can get developed, but all of that is happening within the complete scope of the doctrine. It's happening within Paul's curriculum that Peter said you should hold on to, that Paul said he has summarized for you. It's not happening within any personal person's curriculum. It's not happening within anybody's own scheme of work. It is happening within the scheme of work, the curriculum of Paul as the architect. This is what you need to build yourself, to grow, to fulfill God's purpose. Can someone fully know that? Yes. See 2 Timothy 3 and verse 10. You can fully know it.


2 Timothy 3 and verse 10. It says, "But you..." Don't forget this is 2nd Timothy, he's talking to Timothy as an individual. He said, "But you have carefully followed my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, perseverance, persecutions, afflictions, which happened to me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra—what persecutions I endured. And out of them all the Lord delivered me." That word "carefully followed" is the word parakoloutheo. It means to follow fully. It means like you are going on a lap. You know all these road races or games where they do one lap, two laps. You go the same journey, you go two laps. He's telling him that you have fully followed me. That word is parakoloutheo. It's from two words. We have the word para and the word akoloutheo. And that word akoloutheo is from two words, alpha, which is a union, not a negative, and the word keleuthos, which is a road. So akoloutheo means same road, together on a road, united on a road. Para means beside, side by side. So Timothy had followed him on the road completely. You have been on the same road with me completely, side by side. You have fully followed my doctrine. He learned it within the doctrine because the persecutions he mentioned later, Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, Timothy was not there when it happened. It was after Paul went to Lystra that he went to Derbe where he met Timothy. So he's saying that from my teachings, you have fully known everything about my life, my purpose, my manner of life, you have learned everything within my doctrine. You have fully followed my doctrine.


After he told Timothy that you have fully followed it, what did he tell him next? He said, "But evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived." They will be teaching other than what I've taught you. They will be deceiving people. Now look at verse 14. "But you must continue in the things which you have learned and been assured of, knowing from whom you have learned them, and that from childhood you have known the Holy Scriptures." Stay in that doctrine. Don't add to it. There's no innovation needed, stick with it. Continue in the things that you have learned and have been assured of, knowing from whom you learned them. This is part of the doctrine. Paul is about to show us the tenth part. He said, as you are teaching the doctrine, know from whom you learned it, and that from a child you have known the Holy Scriptures. Where did Timothy learn the doctrine from? Paul and from the scriptures. Paul has eventually become part of the scriptures, like Peter was already pointing to, which is the New Testament text. And he was teaching him that doctrine from the Old Testament text.


The first part of Paul's doctrine is bibliology. Understanding where you derive the doctrine from and the authority of that doctrine. Why do you believe this revelation that Christianity is? You must be able to establish it in bibliology. Why do we have to trust the Bible? From the authority of truth to the gospel proving itself as truth, to the gospel giving authority to the Bible. There's a process. Truth is authoritative existentially. The gospel proves itself to be truth and extends its authority for revelation to the Bible. And then you now start to teach the doctrine. So this is how God is. This is what his purpose was. This is how origin is. This is how creation is. Then start to explain, this is how sin happened. Then start to explain, this is God's wisdom towards redemption when sin happened. You are not going to trust general records, you trust the authoritative record. Why are you trusting that record? Because it is the document for truth that you have proven to be so. This is God's wisdom toward redemption. This is the Christ, Jesus, God that became man. This is redemption, this is how it happened, this is what it entails. This is the church. All rooted in the authority, the Bible.


So we have a doctrinal summary Paul said he gave us, and it has ten parts. Number one is Bibliology. Number two, God and His Eternal Purpose. Number three, Biblical Origin and Ontology. Number four is Sin and Its Implications. Number five is God's Wisdom Towards Redemption. Number six, Christ. Number seven, Redemption and Its Implications. Number eight, The Church and Its Mission. Number nine, The New Creation. Number ten, Eschatology. These are the ten parts to Paul's doctrinal summary. When we understand the doctrinal summaries, what's left, men and brethren? It's time to learn it. He has given us a summary. We are going to summarize everything he taught inside it. Then we move on until we get to an exhaustive explanation in level five. So level two is for doctrinal summaries. And I welcome you to learning Paul's wholesome doctrine in a summary manner. 2 Timothy 3:10 to 17.


track 2
Bibliology


00:00
We are looking at bibliology. It is part of our level two teaching. We are actually just in the first teaching of level two properly. The other one was an introduction. This is the first part of doctrinal summaries. We are looking at bibliology. Let me just start by saying, when we receive salvation and we receive God's purpose, our greatest desire is to fulfill God's purpose. That is the next thing for the believer. You want to fulfill that purpose. But the only way you can fulfill God's purpose is by growth. It is like someone telling you that your purpose is to... let me even use another example that is a natural assignment type of example. Let's say someone says you have to make 10 million Naira in one year. Otherwise they are going to do something bad. Motivational speakers will threaten you that if they tell you right now you must make 10 million Naira in one year otherwise they will kill you, you will find a way. And that is true actually. Sometimes in life motivation is your problem. If they really tell you that you have to make 10 million in one year or you die, I believe some are going to make that 10 million. But at least the first thing is that you sit down and think. I am going to make 10 million now, how am I going to make 10 million? You have to think. You have to prepare.


It is something the Lord Jesus said. He said that he that knows my will and does not prepare and do... So before doing God's will there is preparation. And it is the same thing the Lord said. He said go and make disciples. When you are saved, the next step is discipleship. Discipleship is what gives you that growth that makes you fulfill the purpose of God. So there is the need for preparation. The problem we face with preparation is that if we don't define the preparation, people go about doing different things other than what the Lord expects them to do to be prepared for his purpose. So we looked at what it entails when Jesus said go and make disciples. Luke 6:40 told us that we need to be perfected to become as the master. When we looked at that word perfecting, in Ephesians chapter 4 and verse 12, which is repeating Matthew 28, he said Jesus at the resurrection gave the leaders of the church to perfect the saints. They have to perfect the saints till they come to certain things. What did he mention? Till they come to unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God, perfect man, measure of stature of fullness of Christ.


If we desire to fulfill God's purpose, we need the growth until this point that is described in four ways. We need the growth that brings us to the unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God, perfect man, measure of stature of fullness of Christ. I told you that there are really two things there in those four descriptions. The last two are talking about the state of our stature. Perfect man, that is completely developed humanity. Measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. There is a measurable point of growth he wants us to get to. But the first two are talking about knowledge. Unity of the faith. Faith is the act of believing but that word can also be used for the message believed. He is saying the wholesome unity of the message that you have to believe or that you have believed. The wholesome explanation, understanding of that same message that we have believed. The second one says knowledge of the Son of God. So what we need first is knowledge. That is what the preacher, the pastor, the bishops, the leaders of the church are supposed to minister to us.


It doesn't matter what church you go, who leads you, who the pastor is. The doctrine you are meant to be taught is not determined by them. We face a situation today in the church that is quite concerning, where you find preachers say that for us as a church these are the things that the Lord wants us to be teaching. We have our own things to teach. But no matter who you are as a pastor, we still have to say the truth, which is that you are not the one that defines what you are to teach. The Lord Jesus gave his own leaders who at the beginning determined what we are to teach and they told us that they have closed the gate to us deciding what to teach. They have closed the gate to the liberty for us to decide what to teach. What is to be taught for our growth is already defined. If you listened to the introduction to doctrinal summaries, you would have understood that the apostles have laid that foundation with Paul having the central role, the architect's role in laying that foundation. We saw the doctrinal foundation that was laid, particularly in Ephesians 1:3-14. We saw about nine parts of that outline. But we said that that outline begins with one important part, which we saw in 2 Timothy chapter 3.
05:00
This whole doctrine that we need for our growth begins with what Paul said in 2 Timothy 3:10. Please go there. Let's go there. We'll start from there. Then we are going to start our study on bibliology. 2 Timothy chapter 3 and verse 10. We see from here what is that one part of the teaching that leads to every other part of the doctrine that we must foundationally understand if we are going to have the knowledge that will cause us to have the growth that fulfills purpose. The foundational part of the doctrine is this, bibliology.


2 Timothy 3:10 says, "But you have carefully followed my doctrine." That word there, carefully followed, simply means you have fully followed. Carefully can give us the wrong understanding. It just shows the attitude that Timothy had. But the word used there, parakoloutheo, was not about the attitude he had. It was about going through entirely with him. Timothy fully followed Paul's doctrine, parakoloutheo. It means he was on the same road with Paul side by side. He wasn't on part of the road with him. He was on the entire journey of that road with him, side by side. He had fully followed Paul's doctrine. Every other thing Paul says here must have been part of his doctrine. What makes us know that are some of the things he mentioned, which Timothy did not directly experience with him. He must have taught it to him. He said you have fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, perseverance, persecutions, afflictions that happened to me in Antioch, Iconium, Lystra, which persecutions I endured. And out of them all the Lord delivered me. That means Timothy fully knew Paul's doctrine and the life that Paul lived from that doctrine. Every other thing mentioned was the life he lived. Your doctrine may not be the life you are living. But he is saying confidently that you know my doctrine and that my life matches my doctrine.


And he said this, look at verse 12, "And yes, those who live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution." Now 13 and 14 are major parts I want us to see. "But evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived." Why did he have to say that? Because he is saying, I have taught you my doctrine, some people are going to be saying other things contrary to that. In fact the earlier portion of this 2 Timothy, starting from verse 1 to verse 9, was talking about those who will teach error. Perilous times will come in the last days, people will be like this and like that. They will teach people, they will twist just like Jannes and Jambres did, they were resisting Moses, there will be people like that. But you have known my doctrine. So this is a challenge we face in our age as well that we must be aware of, that in our age we have people teaching all sorts of things. But there is yet the doctrine.


Now, this challenge is on two levels. There is the fact that there will be preachers that are so off from doctrinal truth that can build people. But then, it's one big body of Christ. We can share the primary truth with other people and we know that we are brothers and sisters in Christ, and yet we can still say we all need to come to the unity of the faith. This is important. We need to come to the unity of the faith. There is that doctrine that produces the perfection that fulfills purpose. Paul is warning Timothy, people will deceive people away from it. You have to be faithful to it. Stay faithful to it. Look at verse 14. He says, "But you must continue in the things which you have learned and been assured of, knowing from whom you have learned them." So no matter the deception that is going on around, Timothy, you have to stay faithful. There is that part of deception, no matter the weakness in doctrine as well. Some people are sincere but they are still teaching things that are wrong. You must stay faithful to what you have learned. Every believer has that responsibility just like Timothy as a preacher has the responsibility. Stay with the truth.
10:00
Even if the time comes that people do not endure sound doctrine. You must continue in what you have learned and have been assured of, knowing from whom you learned them. Stay with that truth, steadfastly uphold that truth. Knowing from whom you learned them. And that from a child you have known the Holy Scriptures. He is saying that the entire doctrine I taught you, Timothy, you must keep preaching it, but you must also know from whence you learned it. It is important that you know from when you learned it. That means you must be able to defend the source of the doctrine. It's not enough that you can defend the doctrine or present the doctrine. You must be able to defend the source of the doctrine. Knowing from whom you learned them, and that from a child you have known the Holy Scriptures. He gives him two sources that he learned from. One, he learned from Paul. Which in that sense we'll say makes up the New Testament text, because Paul himself said he received things that we see in the four gospels from others, that Christ died, he was buried, he rose. Then we have the Pauline epistles making up the New Testament text. Then he says, "from a child you have known the Holy Scriptures." There are two places Timothy is said to have learned from. The source of his doctrine. There is Paul as the source of his doctrine, and on the other hand there is the Holy Scriptures, which in this context is talking about the Old Testament text. Right now we can call the entire Bible the Scriptures for us as Christians. Peter will say about Paul's epistles that they twist his epistles as they do the rest of the Scriptures. So for the Christian faith now we call the entire Bible the Scriptures. But in this sense that Paul was speaking, he was talking about the Old Testament text. Thus he is saying that Timothy learned the doctrine from him and from the Scriptures. Why? Because Paul's teaching itself was from the Scriptures. Look at Romans 16. Let me show you that quickly. And then we will see, how do we defend the source of the doctrine and not just the doctrine? How are we sure? There is a careless attitude that we find sometimes with believers where if someone should question them about something they believe, they will say, well that's what the Bible says. Then the person doesn't even believe in the Bible and they are not able to defend the authority of the Bible. That's a problem. The Bible says it, we should believe it and that settles it. I don't understand, that's what I was born into, I just know that the Bible is like that. What about someone that was not born into it, what should the person now do? So you must know the necessity, you must be able, like Timothy was taught by Paul to do. He says, knowing from whom you learned them and that from a child you have known the Holy Scriptures. You must be able to defend the source of the doctrine. It is part of the doctrine to defend the source of the doctrine. So bibliology, the study of the Bible itself, is part of the doctrine. Timothy learned to defend the source of his message.


See Romans 16 and I want you to go to verse 25. "Now to him who is able to establish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery kept secret since the world began but now made manifest, and by the prophetic scriptures made known to all nations." So it says in the preaching of Jesus Christ, what we are declaring is the revelation of the mystery kept secret since the world began, it's talking about God's purpose, but now made manifest, how? That is by the prophetic scriptures. Some texts will put by the scriptures of the prophets. So it is made manifest and that being made manifest is by the prophetic scriptures or the scriptures of the prophets made known to all nations, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, for obedience to the faith. So he's saying the message we are preaching that would establish you, the preaching of Jesus Christ that reveals the mystery of God, His purpose and plan, this message that we are preaching is from the Scriptures. So part of the doctrine is to be able to defend the source of the doctrine. Continuing what you have learned and been assured of, knowing you must know from whom you learned it and that from a child you have known it from the Scriptures.
15:00
If that is the first thing we are meant to understand, that's where we are to start our doctrinal journey from. That's the first part of our doctrinal summary, as Paul gave it to us. How exactly do we defend the source of the doctrine? I want you to go back to that 2 Timothy to see that both the doctrine and the source of the doctrine claim the authority of truth. Both the doctrine and the source of the doctrine claim the authority of truth. And it's on the premise of truth that we defend them. If you go to 2 Timothy chapter 3 and verse 7, it says some people are always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of truth. Now look at verse 8. "Now as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, so do these also resist the truth. Men of corrupt minds, disapproved concerning the faith." Notice he called the faith the truth. They resist the truth, they are men of corrupt minds disapproved concerning the faith. But they will progress no further, for their folly will be manifest to all as theirs also was. But you have followed my doctrine. Do you see what he just did there? He just called his doctrine the truth. Paul was making the claim that his doctrine, including the source of it, claims to be true. Claims to be the truth. In fact, if you read the subsequent verses where he now told him to proclaim the message he is learning, in verse 2 of chapter 4 he says preach the word. In verse 3, he says some will heap up teachers after their own lusts, then verse 4, they will turn their ears away from the truth. What the gospel claims is that it is the truth. What the doctrine that Paul has given us claims is that it is the truth. What the source of that doctrine claims is that it is the legitimate source of doctrine as a matter of truth.


So the authority that the scriptures, the Bible is claiming, is not a random authority, it's not an imposing authority. It is claiming to be the truth. Now that's a heavy claim. It must prove itself to be the truth. If it is claiming to be the truth, it is claiming to be the highest authority existentially. I've told you this before. The highest authority in existence is truth. Now I know you might say it's God. But remember, if you say there is God, people will first question, how do you know there is God, is that the truth? Of course, if there is God, then as a matter of truth he is the highest authority, for he is true. And there is God as a matter of truth. Therefore he is the highest authority just as truth is. But in that sense, the highest authority to any person is the truth. The only reason any person will submit entirely completely to any thought process to anything is because it appeals to them as the absolute truth. The truth is what leads that person to the conclusion of God. Truth is the highest authority existentially. Truth is the highest authority, we can equally say rationally.


Look at 2 Corinthians chapter 13. So if the doctrine is claiming to be truth, as well as the source claiming to be a document of truth, it has to prove itself so. And how does it do this? 2 Corinthians 13:8 says, "For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth." We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. That's to show us what I just explained right now, which is that truth is the highest authority existentially. You can't do anything against truth. The authority of truth is unshakable. You accept it, you reject it, it doesn't change. You can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. It is the highest authority existentially.
20:00
Now to see the claim that the Bible is the document of truth, it actually starts with the claim that the gospel is the truth. Which we have examined in other teachings. See Ephesians chapter 1 and verse 13. "In him you also trusted after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, in whom having believed you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise." So notice that the gospel of our salvation claims to be the word of truth. You trusted after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation. We are seeing why the Bible is sitting in that place as the document of truth. It starts with the fact that its central message, the gospel, and then the expansion of that message, the entire doctrine, is claiming to be truth. You'll notice also in Ephesians chapter 4. At this point Ephesians 1 it is the introductory message that is claiming to be truth. The gospel of your salvation. But if you get to Ephesians chapter 4, you will see that the entire message as well of the doctrine is claiming to be truth. Look at Ephesians chapter 4 and I want you to see verse 15. What does it say? It says, "But speaking the truth in love." You notice that who are the people that are speaking the truth in love there? It's talking about the preachers. He gave the apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers to perfect the saints. They are to speak the truth in love so that we will grow up into Christ in all things. What is the truth he says they are speaking? Ephesians 4:13. They are to bring us to the unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God. So he's calling the unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God, the truth. He's calling the message that they are preaching within the local church, not for your salvation, for your spiritual growth, he's calling that message the truth. So the message we hear to be saved claims to be truth. The message we are hearing for our growth claims to be truth. In fact, Ephesians 4:20 says, "You have not so learned Christ, if indeed you have heard him and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus." As the truth is in Jesus. You have not so learned Christ. What you are learning of Christ, this is not a matter of salvation anymore. It's talking about what we are learning of Christ. What we learn when we are saved, by believing the message of truth, is yet the truth for our growth. What we learn after believing the gospel of our salvation, which is the truth itself, is yet the doctrinal message that is claiming to be the wholesome truth.


Both the gospel that saves us and the doctrine that is designed for our growth so we can fulfill God's purpose claim to be the truth. How does the gospel prove itself to be truth for us to know whether we can trust the subsequent message at all? Remember, what are the things that the gospel proves to be truth? Number one, that there is God. That when we look at the world by observation and reason, by our senses and our mind, we can tell. By your senses and mind you can tell this is a chair, the color of the shirt is white, this person is female, this person is male. You can tell the state of the weather. Except you are sick, then your sense cannot be trusted. But ordinarily, if your senses are normal with every other person, independent witnesses, this is a chair. So he's saying that by observation and reason we can tell that there is God. Why? We are witnessing a world that is finite and contingent. So there must necessarily, in that sense, be a cause. God. Non-finite, non-contingent that has brought the world to be. First thing that is the truth. We are witnessing a world where there is contradiction, there is good and evil. There's right and wrong. There's life and death. There's light and darkness. It's a world that needs redemption. A redemption that only God can give. The light must enter the darkness. The life must enter death. So that redemption has been fulfilled in Christ Jesus. That's the second truth. Or I might even say the third truth. We have said number one there is God. Number two there is a need for redemption. That redemption has been fulfilled in Jesus.
25:00
There are these three claims of truth that we can say the gospel is making. That there is God, that there is a redemption that is necessary for God to fulfill, and that it has been fulfilled in Christ Jesus. The moment a person accepts that truth that, oh yes, it is the truth that there is God, that redemption is necessary, and that that redemption has been accomplished in Christ. The moment anybody accepts that truth of the gospel, then you are saying truth is found where? In Jesus. Which is what we're seeing earlier. You have not so learned Christ and been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. You are saying the authority of truth, existentially and metaphysically, we can now root it in the person of Jesus. We can find it in the person of Jesus. The faith where we are now going to say we trust to find truth will be in the person of Jesus. Therefore the authority of Jesus as the fulfillment of this truth of God and redemption is to be trusted about whatever document he says we are to trust for revelation. Remember, revelation is a different ballgame from things we can know by observation and reason. We can observe and reason that there is God. We can observe and reason that there is a need for redemption that only God can fulfill. We can also by observation and reason conclude that Jesus is God that became a man. Because we are looking at the testimony historically that nobody else claimed exclusively him, and that it is philosophically necessary, prophetically promised, historically fulfilled.


Once we have settled truth in Jesus, then we can now trust him on where to find revelation. So people could have said revelation before him, and they could be right and they could be wrong. They can even believe in redemption and be wrong about revelation. They can believe there is God, they can believe they need redemption, they can believe God will do that redemption. They don't even know the how fully, even some of the Jews did not know the how fully. And then it is fulfilled in Jesus but their faith is still redemptive faith. They can say oh what is God's purpose, they might answer it in different ways in their revelation. But once we find the fulfillment of that truth in Jesus, we have to trust him. Where do we find revelation? Where do we trust for revelation? And he gives us two places to trust for revelation. One, he says this document is the legitimate document to verify this truth I fulfill. He said that. Look at Luke chapter 24. The testimony of himself, he validates with the scriptures. Luke 24 and verse 44. He validates that text before him. The scriptures before him, that of the Jews, the Jewish scriptures, as the divinely orchestrated document for truth. He pointed it out, this is the document. As the divinely orchestrated document for truth. But do you note the interesting fact, it is not only this document that he gave authority of truth to. He also gave authority of truth to his apostles. Let us see John chapter 16 and verse 12. He didn't give the authority of truth only to the scriptures, he also gave that authority of truth as well to the apostles. John 16 and in verse 12. "I still have many things to say to you but you cannot bear them now. However, when he, the Spirit of truth, has come, he will guide who?" He's not talking to everybody. He's talking to a specific set of people, his apostles. He will guide you into all truth. He will guide you into all truth. That means the entire scope of the truth, which refers to the reality of existence and redemptive truth, will be conclusively given to you guys. Even though on one hand he says this scripture has spoken about me and what I have done, everything I preach to you before, the scriptures have said so. Now, when the Spirit of truth has come, upon the work of redemption I do, he will guide you guys into all truth. Of course you must be careful here when he says all truth. He won't tell you about thermodynamics or E=MC squared, or tell you about the fact that it was a big bang.
30:00
The all truth has a specific context. It's talking about all truth on this metaphysical question of the truth of our existence. That's the context. We can say all truth about the truth of existence, all truth about God. Then his purpose and everything that follows thereby. You can say all spiritual or metaphysical truth. We must be aware of the context he is speaking of here where he says all truth. But something is clear, his choice of words "all truth" means there will be a conclusion of truth with these individuals. So concerning the truth we are talking about, everything that needs to be known, it will be given to them. There are people who try to extend it away from them and say well other people from them by succession are going to have it. That is not what Jesus said at all. He said it will be given to them. Once we have it with them, it is done. So he has said these scriptures that of the Jews is a document of truth. It testifies of me. Then the spirit of God is going to guide you upon my resurrection into all truth. Verse 13, "for he will not speak of his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak. He will tell you things to come. He will glorify me, for he will take of what is mine and declare it to you. All things the Father has are mine. Therefore I said he will take of what is mine and declare it to you." We can say it's the truth about God. We can say it's the truth about Jesus. But if we say the truth about God, it's rooted on the question of the truth of existence. So the truth about existence, about life as a whole, you are going to have that truth given to you, the apostles. And that's something Paul will now acknowledge in 1 Corinthians chapter 15. So I'm still trying to help us understand why is the Bible the authoritative document for truth. These are things you will see when we study bibliology. I am just giving us a summary of what bibliology covers. Don't forget this is just doctrinal summaries we are looking at.


Why is the Bible the authoritative document for truth? Because the very message it is saying is provable truth. And the person in whom that message was fulfilled chose these two scriptures. The Old Testament text and the apostles that now form the New Testament text as the authoritative document, as the authoritative source of truth. That is why the Bible now becomes the authoritative document. It's not something that was thrown down from heaven to be so. Before the Bible, what was the authority? It was still truth. That same message. It's just that now that document, the Bible, becomes the authoritative document on the premise we just explained. Because its message is truth, the person in whom the message is fulfilled, Lord Jesus, validated the Old Testament scriptures of the Jews and then the persons of the apostles that make up the New Testament as authoritative sources of truth. In 1 Corinthians 15, Paul will say this, "Moreover, brethren, I declare to you the gospel which I preached to you, which also you received and in which you stand, by which you are saved, if you hold fast that word which I preached to you, unless you believed in vain." Notice that he said I declare to you the gospel that got you saved and that you are also standing in. So it's both for your salvation and your spiritual growth. Verse 3, "For I delivered to you first of all that which I also received: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures." You see that just like the Lord Jesus did, he is using the Scriptures as validated by Jesus as an authoritative source. According to the Scriptures. But he now goes further and says, "and that he was seen by..." Because part of what the scripture has testified must happen, that there must be the victory of life over death, that will be seen in the resurrection, that one the scriptures cannot be the witness of it, it's only testifying it will happen. There will now be authoritative sources for that. And he now says by Peter as number one. So it was seen by Cephas, then by the twelve. After that it was seen by over 500 brethren.
35:00
Of whom the greater part remain to the present, but some have fallen asleep. After that he was seen by James, then by all the apostles. So there were other categories of persons called apostles that were foundational other than the twelve. Then lastly, verse 8. "Then last of all he was seen by me." Notice he says last of all. That means this list is concluded. The authoritative sources for the truth of our existence, the message of the gospel, every other person can testify of the gospel and they will not be in that list. Timothy is not in that list. By the time he says that, we are seeing that this list is concluded once and for all. The scriptures and then these authoritative witnesses that end with Paul. And there's no need to guess, if you listen to the introduction to doctrinal summaries, why does it end with Paul? Paul has this central role, this critical role, this architect role. It ends with him. Therefore, the authoritative sources for truth are as follows: the scriptures and Jesus's chosen witnesses that make up the New Testament text.


Now, you say why particularly the Bible? These people wrote other letters, some of them are lost. I can't go into details on that, when you get to bibliology proper, you will see the explanations there. How did we end up arriving at the very Bible? Who wrote it? Did God throw it down? Is it not people that wrote it? We're asking questions that we are going to handle in bibliology proper. But the substance of the text is unaffected. We bring out the fact that all the texts are like that. Where there's a process of codification and canonization that looks natural, that we must see in it divine orchestration. Both for the Old Testament text and the New Testament text. There's another work which is the process of textual criticism. That one is even still ongoing, where all the available manuscripts have to be examined by critical scholars to try to give us back as closely as possible the original. So we have not the original, but they have to work on it with all the available manuscripts. Now, the differences that arise from different manuscripts are not substantial enough on any major doctrinal issue. Even if the statements of the authors are unchanged. There's no substantial change in the statements of the authors by the time you put the text together. Doctrine will now be a separate issue where people are negotiating interpretation. But what is stated by the authors even in textual criticism is not substantially changed. We will be talking about issues like changes in punctuation. There are some that, you know, like 1 John 5:7 is clearly an interpolation in very late manuscripts. So critical texts will not put that. But by the time you are even done with that, that they remove things that are not there in critical text, they are still always doing textual criticism. Let me just mention this here. I just want to go into detail for this one because I believe it is necessary at this point that at least you know it in level two. Why is the Bible the authoritative document for truth? Because the very message it is saying is provable truth and the person in whom that message was fulfilled chose these two scriptures, the Old Testament text and the apostles that now form the New Testament text, as the authoritative source of truth. That is why the Bible now becomes the authoritative document. It's not something that was thrown down from heaven. Before the Bible, the authority was still truth. It is just that now that document becomes the authoritative document on the premise we just explained. Because its message is truth, Jesus validated the Old Testament scriptures and the apostles as authoritative sources of truth.
40:00
In 1 Corinthians 15, Paul says, "Moreover, brethren, I declare to you the gospel which I preached to you, which also you received and in which you stand, by which you are saved, if you hold fast that word which I preached to you, unless you believed in vain." He says I declare to you the gospel that got you saved and that you are standing in. So it's both for your salvation and your spiritual growth. "For I delivered to you first of all that which I also received: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures." You see that just like the Lord Jesus did, he is using the Scriptures as validated by Jesus as an authoritative source. But he goes further and says, "and that he was seen by Cephas, then by the twelve. After that he was seen by over 500 brethren, of whom the greater part remain to the present, but some have fallen asleep. After that he was seen by James, then by all the apostles. Then last of all he was seen by me." This list is concluded. The authoritative sources for the truth of our existence, the message of the gospel, every other person can testify of the gospel, and they will not be in that list. This list is concluded once and for all. The scriptures and then these authoritative witnesses that end with Paul. And Paul has this central role, this architect role. It ends with him. Therefore, the authoritative sources for truth are the scriptures and Jesus' chosen witnesses that make up the New Testament text.


How did we arrive at the Bible? The Bible came to be by a process of codification. Humans that were writing. Codification. Then eventually canonization. There was a point of canonizing the Old Testament text. That took a while, even for the Jews. It usually happens by a consensus of the people. Even the New Testament text also had a period of canonization that was up to 300 years after the Christ. Eventually the accepted books were by consensus. You cannot hold onto the authority of scriptures without believing in God's orchestration, divine orchestration, divine providence that gave it to us. What you have to check is that does the document satisfactorily give us all of the truth chronologically. It does. Even when you just go to some of the letters of Paul, we already see the scope of what is required to be known for God's redemptive work. And we can get it exactly from the scriptures of the prophets, the Old Testament text. If it does that and this happens to be what we have, it must be taken that it was divinely orchestrated to be so. By events that happened seemingly naturally from codification to canonization, to textual criticism that is a separate issue, this is what has now been handed down to us by divine providence or orchestration. The scriptures coming down by divine providence happened even with the Old Testament text. When the Lord validated the Old Testament scriptures of the prophets, it was by divine providence because certain documents were destroyed. Certain things would not have been accessible. These documents now came to be the acceptable one by consensus naturally that yet was given divine validation in the fulfillment in Christ. Thus the same rule applies to the New Testament text. A process of codification, canonization. When you get to bibliology proper, you will see us handle counter arguments that some human beings sat down somewhere and wrote it. All those things are just nonsense. No serious person that is involved in critical scholarship accepts such things. There might be interpolation in texts, there might be places where some people have written some things that were not original to the text, like John 7:53 to John 8:11. That story of the woman caught in the act of adultery is not original in critical scholarship. So there might be few instances like that, but the substance of the text is unaffected. We will bring out the fact that all the texts are like that. There's a process of codification and canonization that looks natural that we must see in it divine orchestration. Both for the Old Testament text and the New Testament text.
45:00
There's another work which is the process of textual criticism. Where all the available manuscripts have to be examined by critical scholars to try to give us back as closely as possible the original. We don't have the original, but they have to work on it with all the available manuscripts. Now, the differences that arise from different manuscripts are not substantial enough on any major doctrinal issue. Even if the statements of the authors are unchanged. There is no substantial change in the statements of the authors by the time you put the text together. Doctrine will now be a separate issue where people are negotiating interpretation. But what is stated by the authors, even in textual criticism, is not substantially changed.


The authority of the Bible rests on divine orchestration behind it to give us the document of truth. If God has chosen that there is an authoritative document of truth, it means that we have to deal with the language he chose to communicate in and the literature that was used by the writers. The people that communicated were writing in Hebrew, in Greek, and very few instances in Aramaic. There are just few parts of Daniel and Ezra in Aramaic. The rest of it is Hebrew and Greek. They were writing in a particular language. Also, they would have been using different kinds of literature. There are times where they were writing an exposition. Like the giving of the law. There are times where they are not giving an exposition, like when Moses was giving the law, that is not a narrative. But in the same place in Exodus there were narratives. So some places are exposition, some places are narrative, some places are poetry. We must be aware of these different forms of literature that are at play, that will have literary rules that apply to them. When it comes to bibliology, we are not just to be aware of the biblical authority itself. The fact that the Bible is the document of truth and revelation. There is the place of codification, canonization, which all rest on divine orchestration. There is the place of biblical language, biblical literature. There is also the place of biblical history and historicity. Where in handling the Bible, we have to examine whether this history they are telling us actually happened, and where we divide the different portions of history and see which ones are definitely historical and which ones are not definitely historical, or some that are not even necessarily historical at all, they are just figurative. For example, out of this history that the Bible tells, the entirety of the New Testament text is definitely historical. You can argue whether you trust the events happened, but the persons involved were completely historical figures. There is no debate about the historicity of a Paul or a Jesus. A Mary. Because the historicity of those persons is very certain. Even outside of the Bible. When we get to the exile period, there is no question that there was an exile period that played into the period that the Lord Jesus came, where they had now been sent back after the exile but they were still under an oppression because of things that happened in that period. So there is no question about the historicity of the exile period, the historicity of the kingdom period, even though the early parts of the kingdom period have more debate. We can vouch for the historicity of David by archaeological evidence as well. Even though the picture of David in the Bible, some critical scholars would flatter reject it, that he was not a king, he was more like a chieftain. Because that status had not been attained in Israel at that time. But there is no question that there was a David because there was a reference to the house of David in another non-Israel archeology where they said they defeated so and so of the house of David. So it was a recognized house. That figure was known within 100 to 200 years of his existence. Kingdom history we can establish. Where we start to face problems in establishing historicity is conquest backwards. Conquest, Exodus, a lot of questions. How do you handle that as a believer? That is a separate issue. Listen to bibliology. It doesn't affect the substance of our faith, because what the document is communicating is a redemptive message. There are plausible arguments for the historicity of conquest, the historicity of the Exodus. But when we get to the earlier periods of history recorded, like Genesis 1 to 11, the historicity is clearly figurative. When you get to that you will hear and understand that those ones are serving a figurative purpose. Just like a serpent talking.
50:00
It is agreed that Genesis 1 to 11, the personalities are very likely not historical. That is a position that you can readily accept. The rendering of the account is definitely figurative. Like the fact that what we see with Noah is going to be found in the Epic of Gilgamesh, which is a document earlier to the record of Noah. And yet both the Epic of Gilgamesh and this are invariably testifying of a redemptive account. Something is about to go wrong and some people are delivered. That has been with humanity from inception. That truth of redemption. What we find out is that this document we have in our hands, the Bible, is the authoritative document for truth because of its message, not because of accuracy of details or even of history. But accuracy of the message. There is a God, there is the necessity of redemption that is now fulfilled in Christ Jesus, that is to direct our life in the light of God's purpose. Very important. All of this is in bibliology. We have established why the Bible is authoritative. We have seen that the Bible came to us by a process of codification and canonization that is natural but that is underpinned by divine orchestration, divine providence. We have seen that that means when we are dealing with the Bible we are dealing with language, literature and history. And this language, literature and history is what we now need to handle to arrive at what the message is. The handling of this language, literature and history is by a process of interpretation. I can't give us the process of interpretation in this teaching, it will take our time. But the process of interpretation rests on two texts. Second Timothy chapter 2, verse 15. "Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, a worker who does not need to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth." That word rightly dividing is orthotomeo. That means you are breaking down the word of truth exactly the way it was put together. Like someone that has a car or a phone and you are undoing the phone the way it was put together, or you are disassembling the car the way it was put together. When you disassemble it that way, you can put it back together again. That is making you wise. You are able to see how the car was broken down and put together. The scriptures are making you wise unto salvation. The scriptures are making you wise. So when we are handling the scriptures we are doing a disassembling and reassembling work that now becomes clear. That is the process of interpretation. There is a defined process of doing that, where you are breaking down exactly. This is the history, this is the literary genre, this is the literary element, literary technique here, this is the language here, the words, this is what they mean, the idioms, this is the syntactical structure. And then you are now putting it together. When we have interpretation it leads to theology. When we put the interpretation of the Bible text together, we have clear theology. Biblical theology is wholesome when we take the Bible text completely into account and yet apply philosophical reasoning. Philosophical reasoning is what we apply in everything we do. I could have actually said apply rational inquiry. Systematic theology is a product of biblical theology plus philosophical theology and historical theology. If we are going to have a proper grasp of the Bible text you must not go and create your own theology independent of the Bible. You accept the Bible what it is saying, examine it with the process of rational inquiry, which is based on philosophy, logic, logical reasoning, epistemology. The tools of logic and epistemology are at play in how you are now handling the entire biblical detail that you have. Rational inquiry at play as well as consideration of history. When you have biblical theology, philosophical theology and historical theology, you would have an wholesome systematic theology which will in turn guide your practical theology.


I will wrap up there for now. So bibliology, when you get to level five, will explain to you how to handle the scriptures. First to explain to you why the scriptures are authoritative, how they came to be, how to handle this document in its language, literature and history, with proper interpretation, to arrive at an wholesome theology. To show you what an wholesome theology should look like and to show you how to preach it as well under biblical homiletics. This is bibliology and is the first thing that you must know as a believer if you fulfill God's purpose. Why will I trust everything that this document is teaching? How will I know what it is teaching? Interpretation. That is what bibliology must establish in your heart. From here we will start getting into what this text is now teaching.


track 3
00:00 – God and His Eternal Purpose
All right brothers and sisters, we are on level two. We are looking at God and His eternal purpose. In this subject matter in the systematic theology of different people, they may call it theology proper because theology is taken as the entire subject matter of scripture, the study of God. But the study of God Himself is often called theology proper. We just call it God and His eternal purpose because we are teaching for everybody's understanding, and we are not trying to be overly technical.


In doctrinal summaries, we started out saying that there is a body of knowledge necessary for us to fulfill God's purpose. Right after someone has received the gospel and becomes saved, you have entered into God's purpose. What is next is you want to fulfill God's purpose for your life. The fulfillment of God's purpose requires discipleship. The Lord Jesus said to go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and teaching them. He says to make disciples via teaching them to observe all things whatsoever He commanded. There was a specific body of knowledge to be taught.


That is later called the apostles' doctrine in Acts chapter 2 and verse 42. By the time we get all the way through to Paul, Paul was saying that what we are built on is the foundation of the apostles and prophets, where he has a central role in the submission of that message. He made that clear in Ephesians chapter 3, verses 1 to 4. Peter acknowledged Paul's wisdom and grace in the presentation of the message. In Ephesians chapter 3, when Paul was making that statement, he told us how that by revelation, this grace gave him the privilege of revelation such that God made known to him the mystery. That is quite funny because the mystery is already found in the Old Testament text, but he is saying that there is a presentation and an understanding that he has the privilege to give us.


If you have listened to the introduction to doctrinal summaries, you will recall that Paul had written briefly this outline of God's message in Ephesians 1, from verses 3 to 14. There is another word Paul used in verse 4. He said by which when you read, you will understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. That word knowledge is the word sunesis, which is like the parallel word to the word wisdom, sophia. Sunesis means understanding. It means putting things together. It is like solving a puzzle, taking every piece and putting them in their place. When we read Ephesians chapter 1, we see Paul's presentation, understanding, or putting together of the message. That is the message the Lord Jesus gave for our discipleship.


Ephesians chapter 4 says the leaders of the church are given to perfect the saints so that the saints will fulfill God's purpose. They are to perfect the saints till they arrive at this knowledge that God wants them to have: this unity of the faith, this knowledge of the Son of God, which results in the perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
05:00 – The Authority of Scripture and the Reality of God
We have looked at bibliology because we saw in 2 Timothy chapter 3 that the first thing the student of God's word ought to know is how to defend the source or the authority of the doctrine. The doctrine is from the Old Testament text and the apostles who make up the New Testament text. The student of God's word must be able to say clearly why they respect and hold the Bible as authoritative. Sometimes some of us hold the Bible as authoritative simply because we were brought up to do so out of a dogmatic stance. We hold the Bible as authoritative because of the authority of truth that finds itself in the person of Jesus, who then validated the Old Testament text as well as the New Testament text.


If we go to Paul's outline of doctrine in Ephesians 1 from verses 3 to 14, what do we see? Immediately after the salutation—where he says, "Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to the saints who are in Ephesus, faithful in Christ Jesus, grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ"—he writes, "Blessed be God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with every spiritual blessing in heavenly places in Christ." The very first subject matter of Paul's discussion is God.


He didn't stop there talking about what God has done to us now in Christ; he took it a step further and said, "Just as He chose us in Him before the foundation of the world." He is taking us into God's mind before He ever made the world. The claim of God itself is not being proven here; he is just asserting it because he does the proving elsewhere. He is simply stating his doctrine. He says there is a God, He has made you like this, and He did this in the light of something He planned before the foundation of the world. He chose you that you should be holy without blame before Him in love, having predestined you to adoption as sons by Jesus Christ to Himself according to the good pleasure of His will.


The doctrine of Paul, which we call the unity of the faith, starts with the reality of God. Once you cross the bridge of the source of the scripture, the first subject matter you will be examining is God, and not just God in His person, but His mind. Later in verse 9, he is going to call it God's purpose. The entirety of Ephesians chapter 1 from verses 3 to 6 is simply talking about God and His purpose and plan. That is the beginning point of the doctrine.


He describes it as the good pleasure of His will. That purpose is called out in Ephesians chapter 3 and verse 9: "And to make all see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the ages has been hidden in God." The idea of the fellowship of the mystery means everybody is supposed to be part of what we saw with the Israelites. Every kind of human is supposed to see the commonness of the mystery. The mystery is sonship. God created all things through Jesus Christ to the intent that now the manifold wisdom of God might be made known by the church to the principalities and powers in heavenly places, according to the eternal purpose which He has accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord.
10:00 – Defending the Faith and Understanding Evidence
We call this first part of the doctrine "God and His Eternal Purpose." All these things are necessary to build your conviction so that you can have the requisite persuasion to fulfill God's purpose. When your conviction is shaky, your commitment to God's will and purpose will equally be shaky. Imagine having doubts about the Bible because you have not studied bibliology. Someone throws a spanner into your beliefs, calling the Bible a tool of manipulation or claiming someone just sat down somewhere and wrote it. If you are not with firm conviction, your faith can be shaken.


Another area where faith gets shaken is if you lack firm conviction about the reality of God and His eternal purpose. In the systematic theology Paul has given us, there are certain things that must become clear to you. One thing is that the Bible submits to us the reality of God. In fact, this is the very first thing the gospel establishes. In Ephesians 1:13, it says, "In Him you trusted after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation." The first truth that the gospel seeks to establish is the reality of God. Everything rises and falls on this.


The Bible answers the metaphysical question: Why are we here? How could we even be here at all? Why is there something rather than nothing? Some people assume the Bible is just a book asserting things. It is actually a book providing evidence for conclusions that it says are the truth. The scriptures show us the evidence God gives to persuade us to come to Him. God is calling us.


Go to Romans chapter 1. "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation to everyone who believes, for the Jew first and also for the Greek. For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith." When people believe, the righteousness of God is revealed to them. Look at verse 18: "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and all unrighteousness of men who suppress the truth in unrighteousness." Why are some people seeing the wrath of God revealed to them? Because of their response. The wrath of God is revealed to those who suppress the truth. This implies that the gospel is the truth, and it is obvious or evident to them. It is something they can see, but they add other things to reject it.
15:00 – Observation, Reason, and the Contingent World
Look at verse 19: "Because what may be known of God is manifest in them." It is manifest in their minds. It is manifest in them because God has shown it to them. They know it by observation and reason. Their observation and senses have caught a glimpse of it and gotten the requisite data to arrive at that conclusion. By observation and reason, we can arrive at the conclusion of truth. This is true about any subject matter. If someone asks what color of shirt a person is wearing, you look at what the person is wearing. You think about it because you know colors and labels, and you arrive at a conclusion.


Paul is saying their observation has made available to their reason the conclusion of this truth, which they are suppressing. Go on to verse 20: "For since the creation of the world, His invisible attributes are clearly seen." It uses the eyes as a placeholder for all forms of observation. "His invisible attributes are clearly seen, being understood." That is the mind. Observation and reason. Just the same way you arrive at every other conclusion, whether scientific or metaphysical, you require observation and reason.


He says His invisible attributes are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made. He shows us two things: from the creation of the world, finitude. Understood by the things that are made, contingency. The finite nature of the world—the fact that time is counting—and the contingent nature of the world—it is made, it doesn't have to be, it could have not been—points to the fact that it has a cause equal or greater to it.


The only way we can explain the finite, contingent world is a cause equal or greater to it. By nature, you cannot see the person of God. Sometimes people say God can resolve a matter by just appearing right now. When you say God can appear now, you are assuming He exists in matter, space, and time and should be rendered in matter, space, and time, which He is not. You are demanding of Him something that contradicts His very nature. By nature, He is invisible to the visible world. You cannot demand of Him what He just isn't.


The evidence for who He is is already available. People are simply raising the bar to reject the conclusion they are naturally led to by the evidence. You are requiring the standard of science—empirical evidence—for someone not bound by that. This is a metaphysical issue. If God appeared in a vision, people would say they were hallucinating, because any appearance in time, space, and matter is an apparition, a rendition. The reality of the person cannot be bound by time, space, and matter.
20:00 – God's Status and Absolute Sovereignty
The evidence of this natural world leads us to the conclusion that God is the most rational, sound, and probable conclusion about our existence. Something finite and contingent calls for a cause that is equal or greater to it. This must be an infinite, non-contingent cause that has intelligence and character. Once we see an entity with such ability, intelligence, and character, we are talking about a personal being. Thus, the conclusion is God.


This conclusion is obvious to everyone. In Romans 10, Paul says they have all heard the message, quoting Psalm 19, which states that day unto day utters speech, night unto night utters knowledge. The scriptures are clear; by reason, the evidence from nature leads to the metaphysical conclusion that there is a self-existent, necessary being with the ability, intelligence, and character to bring forth this finite and contingent world. If we judge this by the way we do all rational inquiry, our conclusion without debate ought to be God.


The first thing the gospel seeks to establish is the reality of God as a non-finite and non-contingent person. He is not made. There is no way He could have been another way. He is a necessary being, self-existent, not a creation.


The next step is to know His status. We all have status relative to something else. What is God's status relative to everything that exists? We are dividing everything that exists into two categories: the self-existent being, and created, contingent existence. One is self-existence, necessary by His very nature. The other is contingent. Therefore, speaking of status, one is supreme because He is determinant of the other. One is supreme in authority and standing. In existence, only this particular person is sovereign.


Sovereignty is a subject matter in the church that has been an issue. People have different angles and opinions on it. But one thing is undebatable: God is sovereign. We must establish that God is sovereign absolutely. When we talk about the sovereignty of nations today, a supposedly sovereign nation might have another nation intervene and kidnap its president. The United States exercising a form of sovereignty over another nation is an action people sometimes wrongly attribute to God's style of sovereignty. When we talk about the sovereignty of God, He is sovereign absolutely in the sense that He could have determined whatever He wants.
25:00 – Free Will and God's Character
By His status, He has the right to do whatever He wants to do. Whatever we find as created existence is His choice. He is self-existent to have done anything. His sovereignty is not just a matter of what He did, but who He is. Because He is self-existent, He could have created a world where there is no free will whatsoever. That is the nature of His sovereignty. He is at liberty. What could have happened is anything possible to Him.


Some people ask, if there is free will in the world, does that mean God is not absolutely sovereign? God is absolutely sovereign in His status. Did He choose to have free will exist in that world? That is a separate issue. But could He have done whatever He wanted to do? There is no debate. As a matter of status, He could. You cannot dictate to Him whether He is going to create a world with free will or not. A world with free will doesn't affect His sovereignty; it is proof of it. A world without free will wouldn't affect His sovereignty either.


The next thing we see under this study is the character of God. This is another vital part of the study. What can we say the character of God is, and what can it not be? From the standpoint of our own existence, we see a contradiction in this world: light and darkness, life and death, good and evil, right and wrong. We must ask what we make of our origin and our Creator. What is His character?


Some people say He has both light and darkness. But He cannot have both, because the very presence of one is the absence of the other. The presence of darkness is simply the absence of light, because light is original. That is why 1 John 1:5 says, "God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all." This is a conceptual, metaphysical claim that we cannot attribute contradiction to Him. You cannot say light and non-light exist in the same place in the same respect. It doesn't make sense. The very presence of light means there is no darkness. Very important to God's character is the emphasis that He is just light. He is just life. He is goodness. He is righteousness.


There are things we can never fully resolve, particularly the problem of evil. But we must be honest and say that evil is not of His character. In His sovereignty, we can attribute everything to Him, even things He did not directly want, simply because He set up the system. But we must have a clear philosophical and biblical theology to make the right conclusions about His character.
30:00 – God's Abilities and Eternal Purpose
We also look at the ability of God. In the light of His status and character, His ability is that He can do everything that aligns with His character. We must be careful when we say God is omnipotent and can do all things. Can He lie? Hebrews chapter 6 clearly states it is impossible for God to lie. His ability is bounded by His character. He cannot do what contradicts His nature.


Finally, we look at His mind, or what we call His eternal purpose. Paul focused on this in Ephesians 1 from verses 3 to 6. In His mind, we speak of order. We can speak of His good pleasure (what He likes), His will (what He wants), His counsel (what He determined), and His purpose. All of this happens in His mind. We also see foreknowledge, predestination, and election in Romans 8:28-30. Because He foreknows, He is able to work all things together.


Foreknowledge, predestination, and election simply mean that God foreknows humanity's condition—sin. He predestined salvation in Christ and elects those who choose to receive salvation. The election is an effect of the setup He made. For example, let us say I want to give one million dollars, and there are a hundred people. I scatter a hundred balls around a location. Whoever finds one ball within twenty-four hours gets the money. I have not limited anyone from finding a ball. Everyone can get one. Some may say they are not interested. Some may follow my directions and find it. Everyone can become part of my chosen people for the money, not because I directly forced them, but because I chose the parameters of who I will choose.


God's election operates on faith in the redemptive work of Christ, not on arbitrarily picking individuals in themselves. He elected based on the conditions He set: faith. This is the understanding of His mind we must have. He foreknew what man would do, predestined the solution in salvation, and elects those who align with the condition of salvation.


All of the things we have seen—the reality of God, His status, character, ability, and mind—produce His activities. Paul says God was like this before the foundation of the world. He already had this entire mind, and therefore He started executing His activities. The activities of God happen on three levels: creation, redemption, and all time. He is interacting with humanity constantly.


This is where we wrap up for now on God and His eternal purpose, doctrinal summary level two, theology proper.


track 4
Biblical Origin & Ontology


00:00


Welcome to doctrinal summaries 3. We are looking at the third part of the doctrine as submitted by the apostles, centrally Paul. This one is biblical origin and ontology. We used to call it creation. It's not bad, but I feel like we are using a conclusion for the title, which is not good. The big question here is how do we explain the origin of our world. If we are not able to show that it's by creation, then we shouldn't call it creation. After a while, I changed the title from creation to biblical origin and ontology. That means how do you explain the origin of a contingent and finite world. Nobody is debating the contingency and finitude of the world, but how. Some will say there's no explanation, it just is. Brute fact. That's what we are trying to deal with: biblical origin and ontology, what's going on. The origin and ontology of what we are witnessing. That's what it's about. If it leads us to creation, fine, we should accept that, but I think it's a better title to go that route.


Don't forget this is doctrinal summaries. We are saying there is an exhaustive doctrine that Jesus laid down, passed down to the apostles they have given us, that is necessary to build our confidence and conviction so that we can walk in a way to fulfill God's purpose. I've said before that right after salvation you have received God's purpose, the next burden you have is I want to fulfill God's purpose. Fulfilling God's purpose requires discipleship. The Lord Jesus said that in Matthew chapter 28. You need discipleship to be able to fulfill purpose.


Let's imagine someone says the assignment, burden, or purpose I have for you is to carry two bags of cement at once on each hand from here to maybe a 400 or 1000-meter distance. I don't know whether that's too much. But you're like, man, I can't do that. But maybe if I gym well enough for maybe one month, I eat the right food, eat eggs, do this, do that, maybe if I follow all the rules and gain some weight and have the right build, I will be able to do it. The person gave you a task that has a goal. But you realize that there's another goal you need to meet in growth to be able to fulfill that eventual purpose. That's precisely how it is. When you enter into God's purpose for your life, you are seeing that I must fulfill God's purpose, but you need to first get to the point in growth where you can fulfill that. To get to that point, the Lord says you need discipleship. There is a building, a training, a strengthening by discipleship that is supposed to happen to you. That discipleship will perfect you as a saint.


05:00 That's why when Paul speaks about Ephesians 4, he said the leaders are given for the perfecting of the saints. That will bring them to this point that God wants them to be at. The perfect man. The measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. How will they get there? By the doctrine. They will come to the unity of the faith, knowledge of the Son of God. Then they will be in faith about that knowledge. There's that knowledge of the word that we need, and we said it is definite.


The apostles have laid down that doctrine the Lord said they should. Paul shows that he has a central role there, and Peter acknowledges him in that light as well. Paul actually says that twice. First Corinthians, some will argue that it's just contextual, but I don't think so. Then Ephesians chapter 3. That one is definitely not contextual. Paul is showing his role in the submission of the message. He tells Timothy, you have fully known my doctrine. There's a definite body of knowledge that Timothy had fully learned from Paul. He told him in 2 Timothy 2:2, pass it down to other people the same way.


There's an outline of the doctrine that is designed to build the believer into that point in growth where he's able to walk how God desires him to. If they say, can you say this about God, how are you sure that's even correct? He says, calm down, you can think about it yourself. The one that is revelation, he will say that one is revelation. And say this is why we can also trust this particular revelation. But this one I'm telling you, you are supposed to see it yourself. That there is God, that this is his status. That this is his character, that this is his ability. That this is his mind—we have to go into revelation at that point. It is hidden in God. It's a mystery that must be revealed. Then these are his activities as a result. You must be able to explain. He is stable because he has gone through the doctrine.


One of the things I wanted to say about why we are looking at doctrinal summaries is that Paul's ability to state the doctrine summarily is part of your grasp of the doctrine. Sometimes we say, I can't say all these things now, we have to get into very long teachings about it. How many people will go through all the long teachings? Your ability to say, what is it I need to know about God, and say it's quite comprehensive, but I can give you the entire outline in a summary form. It's part of your effectiveness in the knowledge of God's word. That I know God in a wholesome way. Even though I still need to explain more details, like if you give me this text I might not be able to fully dissect it now, but I know the boundaries. That this is likely speaking of the sovereignty of God because I attribute everything to Him, but I might need to get a better light and explanation on it, but I know this.


10:00 The same thing now goes to the subject matter we are about to look at, which is biblical origin and ontology. When Paul says in Ephesians chapter 3 that he has given us that summary of the doctrine, the second thing we see that Paul puts in his outline is biblical origin and ontology. Ontology just means the nature of something. The way something is. The being, the nature, the state of something. The ontology here is the ontology of our world. The origin here is also the origin of our world. We just call it biblical origin and ontology of everything of our world. We don't need to put any other thing there, that's what we are pointing to.


We've talked about God. Everything we are seeing, what's it all about? From God. What's the origin and ontology? Under God we have already sort of answered that. But we need to examine it on its own, particularly the ontology, and reaffirm that origin. Let's go to Ephesians chapter 3. Paul says in Ephesians chapter 3 and verse 3, how that by revelation God has made known to me the mystery which I have briefly written already. The ability to have a summary of the doctrine is itself part of your skillfulness with the message. There's a comprehensive, exhaustive, detailed study. But can you just tell someone the answer? Some people say, I can't tell you, we have to study, and I know some things are detailed, I'm not denying. But despite that, Paul still gave a summary. You should be able to state some things summarily. Not that that will resolve everybody's doubt or answer every question in the way a more detailed study would make someone more settled. But at least to be able to give someone the requisite stability to start with is very important. Otherwise, people are going to live their entire Christian life in doubt and shakiness. Some people can't get to look at some of the doctrines exhaustively. Level 5 is work.


You have to be stable to say, I get it now, these are the foundational things. Particularly look at that study we did on God. You should be able to have that stability that now I get it. This is who He is. It should bring confidence to your faith. It's not someone that will do evil. Evil might happen for whatever reasons, but I know I can rely on what I know about His character. Aside from bibliology, which is defending the source and authority of the source of the doctrine—something Paul mentioned to Timothy in 2 Timothy chapter 3—and then God and His eternal purpose, what we can also call theology proper, we are looking at biblical origin and ontology, which we sometimes simply call creation. Study of the natural world or the created world, the world as God made it at origin. This is something I want us to appreciate. Another reason why we call it biblical origin is to have an appreciation of the Bible's role in discussing the origin of our world.


15:00 Sometimes people are expecting of the Bible a role that it does not have. It can give us the answer to the metaphysical origin of the world. But it's not expected to give us the answer to the scientific origin of the world. Like how do we explain how it all began to play out since then. It can play its own role rightly so in submitting the truth about our world, that it resulted by such and such. But it's not expected that it tells us the scientific means and process by which that happened. Expecting that of Scripture is likely going to read it the wrong way. That's not something that it set out to do.


In Ephesians chapter 1, where Paul gives a summary of his doctrine, Ephesians 1 and verse 3, he says blessed be God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. He's talking about our present reality; He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. Verse 4, just as He chose us in Him. Look at how far back. He has blessed us now in Christ, then He says just as He chose us in Him before when? Remember under the summary of God and His purpose, we saw that choosing us is not us in ourselves. It's rather a choice with a condition, a choosing based on the conditions set. Which now becomes personalized to us. We must be honest about the fact, lest we are stating that which is contrary to what reflects the truth of God. How far back was this decision about who He wants, about who He is choosing, made? Verse 4, just as He chose us before the foundation of the world. I like the choice of the word there, foundation, katabole. It shows that sense of origin, when something was put down. We can say in that sense, before the origin of the world. There was in His mind the conception of what He wants before He originated it at all. We are seeing a discussion that pertains to origin. Biblical origin and ontology.


He says before the foundation of the cosmos. There is a world he's talking about. He says that world, there was a point it was founded, it originated. He's claiming here that it must have originated by God, something that the gospel affirms as well in Romans chapter 1. We have seen this under several teachings, but let's go back there one more time. This time around I'll probably refer to Romans 10 and Psalm 19, because here we would have to visit the Old Testament text a bit. What he's saying is that because of the ontology of this cosmos we are seeing, we can tell that it has a foundation. The ontology of this cosmos is why we can tell the nature of it. Because by nature it is finite. Because by nature it is contingent. Finite means it is limited. Infinite means it's unlimited. Unlimited can mean unlimited in time. When we say unlimited time for God, that would be a difficult thing because we are simply trying to look into a realm that is timeless. A realm that is difficult for us to look into. When we talk about observation and reason, it pertains to our world and it pertains to reason generally, but there's a limit to it. When we are looking at the way God is, there's a limit to which our reason can work there because that realm is not as accessible as this one. We can make conclusions about this one that there is that realm, but the operations of that realm is more difficult for our mind to grasp. That's where we'll sometimes find ourselves needing revelation or sometimes accepting things by revelation that we cannot fully resolve with reason. This is very important, and there are about three conclusions like that that you have to accept by revelation, even though you cannot fully reconcile them with reason. And this is the reason why.


20:00 I can't get into those now. We are still about truth. It's just that these are things that it won't be out of place to accept by revelation, like the "why" question. It won't be out of place to accept by revelation. It would be out of place to say God can do good and evil and we just accept that by revelation. That one would be out of place. That's a contradiction; that's saying X and not X are the same in the same respect. It won't make any sense that He gave us our reason and we expect to accept that. But there are such things that are of such kind when something is "why" or when something is within a domain that is now far beyond our observation and reason. It's not concluding that there is that domain that is the issue. It's explaining that domain; sometimes you just have to accept revelation about how that domain is. These affect the way the Christian sees the nature of God. Something we didn't really get into as much, we just talked about status, character, ability. I should have talked about the Trinity. Why would we accept the Trinity? We are dealing with matters that are in a domain that are not within the scope of our observation. That domain, we can arrive at it via what is within the scope of our observation. But the operations of the domain is not within the scope of our observation and reason. At that juncture, if we find only this truth now revealing that, we are to accept it. However challenging for our reason it is. Like we accept the purpose, that one is not challenging per se, that's just what God's purpose is. But to now say accept another worldview that does not resolve what we can see with observation and reason because it's more convenient from the standpoint of observation and reason about a domain that is not here, will not be the way to go. Let me save you all the big English, back to Romans.


Romans 1. What do we observe about the nature of our cosmos, our world, that helps us to explain its origin, its foundation? What do we understand about the nature of it? I was talking about it is finite, meaning it is limited. We can see that limitation from the standpoint of time. If it is limited in time, it means it has not always been. Therefore requires explanation. But it can even be infinite in time and still limited in its nature. Its ontology is still limited in the sense that it is finite by contingency; it didn't have to be. Which means it is not just a state necessarily, it's a finite state that was made to be because it didn't have to be. It's still finite by virtue of contingency. Contingency means it did not have to be. Therefore that it is requires an explanation. The opposite of contingency is that it just has to be necessary. That one cannot be said to be finite, that's just how the thing is. Particularly if this is the state of fullness. It's just how it is. Romans chapter 1. He says the gospel of Christ, the power of God unto salvation. You can see the Ephesians 1 idea there where the gospel is called the truth. Verse 17 says the righteousness of God is revealed towards those who believe. Verse 18 says the wrath of God is revealed towards those who don't believe. But he described them as those who are suppressing the truth in unrighteousness. He's saying that the same gospel some believe to have righteousness is the one that some suppress, which leads to the wrath of God.


25:00 He called what they are suppressing truth. He's calling the gospel the truth. Why is he calling it truth? Because what may be known of God is manifest in them, in their reason, for God has shown it to them, to their observation. For since the creation of the world His invisible attributes are clearly seen—observation—being understood—reason—by the things that are made. Two things are there. For since the creation of the cosmos. That means that space of what we refer to as the world that we observe, that material world that spans our solar system, whatever dimension of scope they want to give our cosmos, the universe, has a point of creation. It's an affirmation. The statement says from the creation of the world. That means our world as it operates began to do so from an origin. Then he says, being understood by the things that are made. This refers to ontology, the nature of the world. The word meant "made" there is the Greek word that points to works, deeds, action, activities taking place. In relation to the cosmos, this points to the works of nature, the operations of our world. As observed, we can see that it operates by natural laws. It has functions and operations that are finite and contingent. Very important words. The nature, operation, status of our world is that it is finite, it is limited. We can observe things like time and matter; these are parameters that define limitation. As they exist, when something happens, the next moment it is changing, it is altering. It is telling us that that particular one has ended. It is finite.


The laws and all the forces that are keeping it working, gravity, all sorts of forces at work, are limited forces. It is not operating in infinite capacities or states. It is simply limited. Because of this limitation, it points to contingency. If it is limited, it means it didn't have to be in the final state it is. Meaning it is caused. Our world happens not to be necessary. Which means there is no reason by observation that demands that the world must be. It just simply exists. But it didn't necessarily have to. If it exists but happens to be finite, limited, we can speak of it in time, but even if not in time, by virtue of its contingency it is limited yet by nature. This observation we make about the world leads us to explain that its origin is that it is caused. Because when you see a contingent thing, you have to explain it. Before you can say the contingent thing just is, which is not the normal way rational inquiry is done, you must first seek to explain it. Only if the explanation fails within itself can you then say well it just is. I venture to say, even though people will give objections that we handle at the higher level, those explanations do not fail in themselves. They should be the natural thing we accept. That's why Paul says after them seeing this, they now profess to be wise, they start seeking evidence against it, and in doing so, he says they become fools. Let's go to Romans 10. This observation of the ontology of the world is not unique to the New Testament text. The observation that the world is finite and contingent, Paul will say everybody can see that, and they ought to believe in God as well as in redemption.


30:00 In Romans 10, when he was talking about everybody should believe the gospel, you can read it from verse 13. For whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How shall they call upon Him whom they have not believed. How shall they believe on Him they have not heard. Go all the way to verse 18. He said they can't believe on someone they have not heard. They can't call on someone they have not believed, and they can't believe on someone they have not heard. The real question here is, have they heard? On one hand, he first said, can they hear except they are sent? But he's going to show us that God has sent something else to testify so that everyone can hear even before people. Look at verse 18: but I say, have they not heard? What's the answer he gave? Yes indeed. Their sound has gone out to all the earth. Their words to the ends of the world. What is he talking about? He's quoting from Psalm 19. Go to Psalm 19 and see it yourself. This evidence, witness that has gone out into all the world. Psalm 19 and verse 1: to the chief musician, a Psalm of David. The heavens declare the glory of the Lord. He's saying that the world, cosmos, that we are witnessing is testifying to a self-existent supreme source. Declares the glory of God. The firmament show His handiwork. Handiwork again is pointing to contingency. Something that doesn't have to be, therefore it is made to be so. It is not necessary in its nature, therefore it is made to be so. He won't only point out the contingency of the world. He first said heavens declares glory of God. Firmament is handiwork. They show themselves to be something made, they show themselves to be contingent. Verse 2 will show us finitude.


I hope all these things are not too much. I hope over time it becomes common to people's understanding. I knew at the beginning there's a friction of all this big English. Verse 2 says day unto day utter speech. That means when we see time counting forward, it's telling us something. That's the testimony of finitude. When time is counting forward, the implication is it cannot count backward endlessly; it is finite. Because if it counts backward endlessly, it means it is still counting backwards till now in a way that today will never have arrived. A backward count is happening in an infinite way that can never allow us to get to today. Let me use an example. We can have infinity in mathematics where we start with zero, then we say minus one. Is there any end to that minus? No. There is literally no end. Numbers can continue endlessly. There's no end to that minus. Minus one trillion, quadrillion, it can go on literally forever. Numbers just need to keep being added.


He's saying that when I see day unto day, things are counting forward in time. Things cannot go backward without end, otherwise, because they will keep going backward without end, we cannot get to today. Which means day onto day is telling me that this world is finite. Day unto day utter speech, night onto night utter knowledge. The finitude of the world is talking to us. It is not possible that this world is not finite. Verse two is what will be called the cosmological argument. Verse one, which I'm saying is talking about contingency based on the word handiwork, is the contingency argument or an ontological argument. He's saying there is the testimony of the necessity of God as the most rational, most probable conclusion about our world. Most rational, I'm saying in the degrees of rational judgment from impossible to possible to plausible to probable, this is the most rational in the sense that it is most probable. Even if you can say it's plausible that it's brute fact, it is not most probable with the evidence we have.


35:00 He says day unto day utter speech, night unto night utter knowledge. There is no speech or language where their voice is not heard. I was having a conversation with someone. I said there is nowhere people have not arrived at the conclusion of God before. It's not possible there's a people, culture, or place, because the testimony of God is everywhere. There's no people, culture, or place they have not arrived at the conclusion of God before. In fact, I can further argue there's no people, culture, or place they have not arrived at the condition of redemption before. That's why people always seek deliverance from problems. We know that those things are not right and that there's a need for the right. There is nowhere people have not heard the faith of redemption before. How they now eventually from there start to pass it out is a separate issue. But that the message of God or redemption has not been anywhere is not true. It is inescapable for man. The reliance on God for that deliverance, salvation, redemption, or reliance on self is a separate issue. But there is no place where people have not witnessed that reality of God or necessity of redemption. This is a domain in a particular domain. I will argue that. It's just the way of humanity. Biblical origin and ontology. The ontology of our world leads us to a conclusion about its origin that it must be caused by a non-finite, non-contingent, that is necessary being, a self-existent being.


Therefore, it must have been created by God. Creation is a conclusion relative to the ontology of our world. Creation is a conclusion about the origin. Creation is a conclusion about the origin of our world based on its ontology. Concluding that God made the world. Typically at this point, people have the question: fine, you have said God made the world, they will now ask how. And they will say, can the Bible tell us how God made the world? The Bible is not designed to tell you how, other than He did it by His power, which is a metaphysical answer. His self-existent power, intelligence, and character brought forth the world. Science can study and see the exact motions of that how. But that is not the role of the Bible. Why do I say this? When I say creation is the conclusion, it's not for you to go to Genesis 1 or Genesis 2 and say that creation account is how the world was brought forth, it was brought forth in six days. That is not what I'm talking about. If you go there, you'll be misreading the text. It is not the role of the text to do that. The text is only making this metaphysical conclusion. This world we are witnessing, finite and contingent, must have come from a non-finite, non-contingent cause equal or greater to it, God, that has intelligence, character, ability.


What I'm witnessing here, is it a literal account? On many counts, no, the creation account. Of course, sometimes we will be told that there are two creation accounts. On a separate level in critical scholarship, they start talking about the Yahwist and the Elohist. For us as believers in Christ Jesus, the entire text is taken as one piece of God's orchestrated revelation for us. A critical scholar might say it's one particular writer that wrote this, that he was not mindful about this and all that. For us again, coming from what we have studied in bibliology, this is God's orchestration as the one text for us. These two creation accounts, we have to embrace both and understand them with sound philosophical reasoning. What a critical scholar will say, you are just negotiating the text, just accept their contradiction like that. We have to accept it like Jesus, like Paul. I can get into those now.


40:00 When we see the two creation accounts, Genesis 1 and Genesis 2, we have to read them and understand their own role, because the role they serve is not a scientific one. The Bible, not being a scientific document, has its work. We would be right to say the Bible is a philosophical material. The Bible is a theological material, yes, in the sense that the revelation of God is being discussed, but even arriving at God is a metaphysics issue, which is philosophy. It's discussing ethics, discussing epistemology. The same book tells us that by observation and reason we know there is God. So we are seeing epistemology—how we get knowledge—logic, ethics, metaphysics. This is a philosophical material. What kind of Christian do you want to be? You don't have a choice. Your Christianity, your Bible is philosophical; you have no choice but to be one. You might be talking about worldly philosophy and criticizing that and criticizing other kinds of philosophy, but the Bible itself, if you say what domain does it fall to, it's a philosophical material. Claiming to be truth, that's already a philosophical material. The mere claim of truth is epistemology. The manner in which you arrive at truth is epistemology and logic. The things it studies: metaphysics, ethics, morality.


These are the core domains of philosophy. But we now understand that it's theological because in arriving at the conclusion that there is God, it starts to study that God. It's a theological material. When I see the creation account, I must understand that they don't serve a scientific role. I'm dealing with a philosophical material. As far as I'm concerned, I'm told that this world in this philosophical material, Romans 1, is brought about by God's self-existent power. His eternal power and Godhead. That's what we are told. We are not told Big Bang, we are not told this or that, we are just told by His power. In fact, the six-day creation account as people purport can never be an actual creation account. The happenings in the six days were not even creation at all. If at all, they were redemptive. The first day was bringing back light where there was darkness, whilst they told us the meaning of darkness itself is that light has been withdrawn. Implying that there was light originally, light went, was withdrawn, and then light was being restored. So it's a redemption account, that Genesis 1, 2, and 3.


If we are handling it philosophically. Some that want to handle it critically say this person is writing this, this other person is writing that. They will argue against that; that's their lot. Holding the materials together as one, as is our own duty in bibliology, and handling it philosophically, we are seeing a redemptive account, Genesis 1:1 to Genesis 2:3. Light is brought back. There's a flooded earth, a space is put there so that there can be life again. Light is brought back, now space is being made for life. In a flooded place, there can't be life. The birds will die. The fishes of course as well will die in the flooded state, they themselves will die. Plants will die. Any form of animal life, including humans, will die. So He's bringing about space, the second day, for life to exist. That's why the third day, He gathers the water together, there's dry land, vegetative life happens. The fourth day, there's the sun and all of that. The fifth day, fishes of the sea, birds of the air, life is restored. Sixth day, animal and man. Light is restored, life is restored. It's a redemptive account.


It's an account saying there's an original intention, something went wrong, there's a restoration within six days leading to the seventh day of rest. Which is consistent. The idea of rest subsequently was about God's redemption plan being completely fulfilled, that's how they kept reading it across the Scripture. When I'm reading that creation, all I need to know is God created, He's the one that brought forth the world. The accounts themselves are not how He created. That's a separate thing entirely. We must read those properly to understand what they are doing. I'm telling you that that first one is a redemption account. The second one we can say is indeed just saying that God created; that's why it's not explaining in detail. In fact, in that one, animals were created after man. Which is funny because we were told that man was taken from the dust of the ground, which makes sense of the idea of evolution. That means it is via the physics and chemistry that we arrive at the biology that brings forth man. In this sense, we must be careful of saying the Bible is contradicting what we have observed by science. I feel so bad. I saw someone that was saying he's now maybe an agnostic. Why? Maybe the flood of Noah. People get into agnosticism for something that the Bible did not cause.


45:00 Something that interpretation caused. They were expecting that the Bible was literally saying something that it was not saying. Instead of reading it in its literary light. That means in literature this is a mytho-history, and they were reading it as something else, then get offended when they see something from science. It has become a stumbling block. What was not the Bible's own problem, but an interpretation problem. Unfortunately, their fellowship with God hampered just on that. Over time they start to seek further justification for their position, strengthening their heart when the real issue that started it was just an interpretation issue. I feel bad. We must be careful how we approach this issue of biblical origin and ontology lest we abuse the text and it starts to cost our walk with God. People will say, people were living for 900 years, and I study science, I found out they were not living for 900 years. It's a mytho-history. In fact, the Epic of Gilgamesh, where that account was first originally seen in written form before even the Bible's account, used more than 900 years. People were living for 30,000 years, 20,000 years in the Epic of Gilgamesh. This one even mellowed it.


There is a reason for that elongated span of time. It is because, before they could write, they are claiming that human history has been spanning for long. Which is another separate issue that again, by science, we have come to appreciate that the idea of humans just starting six or seven thousand years ago, even ten thousand years ago, is not correct. It can be traced as far back—some will even argue 100,000, some say 400,000, some say 700,000—where the humans that are philosophical beings started to exist. There are different positions different theologians and philosophers hold. Christians hold on that matter. I am even willing, should I say it in this kind of summary, to go as far as 400,000. Usually, I prefer to still stay around 100,000 thereabouts. I have no problem with that at all. All those days are only showing the length of memory they are referring to from the point where they are giving a record in a summary form. I won't get into all those details; those are part of bibliology. When you listen to bibliology, you'll see that under biblical literature, biblical history, and historicity, you will see there on level five. Please don't let an unnecessary interpretation issue become a stumbling block for your faith.


Those accounts are serving another purpose. One is simply giving you a redemption account, one is simply saying creation happened and that it happened with physics, chemistry, biology. Man came from normal physical matter. Came from the dust of the ground. Let's move on in our summary of biblical origin and ontology. One core question we must answer is, what's the purpose of creation? The purpose of creation is rooted in the purpose of the Creator. What is it all about? Sometimes faced with creation, the world, the cosmos, we are faced with existential questions: what's the point of all of this? That's found in the mind of the Creator; it can only be known by revelation. We have seen that already under several teachings, including the last part of these doctrinal summaries. What is God's mind, His purpose? Sonship. That will help us to appreciate the role of every piece that makes up this world. Of everything that composes this world. When we know the purpose, we can say this is the role of this, this is the role of that. It will help us to appreciate the content and the composition of creation. When we know the purpose of creation, we can appreciate the content, composition, and relation of creation. How they relate amongst themselves, what affects what, which one affects the other, how does this one affect this one. When we appreciate the purpose of creation, sonship, which we see is by revelation, we are able to see how they relate.


50:00 When you get to biblical origin and ontology, you will see that we get into the study of the content and composition of creation of this world. At this point, our study of content and composition of creation will go beyond observation and reason to include revelation. I will sum it up in this way: there are four things that make up the world in biblical origin and ontology of the world. Number one, there is the material world. Number two, there is the spiritual world. Number three, there are angels, and number four, there is man. Four things that make up the world. Number one is the material world, number two is the spiritual world, number three angels, and man. You can get that sense even from Genesis 1, when God said let the heaven and the earth. There's heaven and there's earth. There's the heaven upon the earth. The idea of heaven and earth is that there is heaven upon the earth. Let me explain that, because at least you should understand this one at this point even in summaries. The picture we are given of the world, go to Genesis 1. Heaven is not taught as something far off in Scripture; heaven is taught as something here and now. Let me clarify this.


A very foundational understanding of the nature of our world is that it is a spiritual world overlapping the natural. It's heaven upon the earth. You must understand this at level two. I think there's a teaching "What exactly is heaven?" or "True Temple Worship" that might help. "Navigating the Supernatural" might help you understand the concept of heaven better. See Genesis chapter 1 and verse 6. What makes up our world from a biblical standpoint, the Bible being the authoritative document for truth and revelation? Four things: natural/material world, spiritual world, angels, and man. Genesis chapter 1 and verse 6. God said, let there be a firmament. That word firmament in the Hebrew is the word raqiya that simply means space. R-a-q-i-y-a. It simply means space. Let there be space, an expanse of space, in the midst of the waters. At this point the earth was fully flooded, everywhere was water top to bottom, that's the idea. As though the earth is a box and everywhere was water top to bottom. Then He said let there be a space between them. And that should divide the waters from the waters. Look at verse 7. God made the firmament, the space, raqiya, and divided the waters that were under the firmament from the waters that were above the firmament. What are the waters under the firmament? We call that seas. The waters above is what we call clouds. This is not a scientific explanation, it is simply doing a description to make a statement. Look at verse 8. And He called the firmament heaven. The space between the clouds and the seas, the space in between. Where is that space? Here. Is what He called heaven. I'm not the one that wrote it.


He's calling the space between the clouds up and the seas down heaven. If they ask you where is heaven, would you have said that? You would have said heaven is high above. There are texts you have for that because those texts are serving another purpose, talking about the authority of God over everything He created. Very important that you pay attention. He's saying heaven is right here. It's in Genesis 1. Think about it. He said in verse 9, let the waters under the heaven be gathered together in one place and let the dry land appear. You notice He didn't create the dry land, it was already there but it was all flooded. Let the waters under the seas be gathered together. He called the gathering of the water seas and the dry land He called earth. If we say heaven on earth, in Genesis 1, heaven on earth was this space upon this natural earth. Heaven on earth, He was bringing forth a conception of a spiritual world overlapping a natural world. That means our dwelling is a spiritual world overlapping a natural world. This is consistent in Scripture. Since this is a summary we don't have time, but you see the idea of Jacob's ladder. It's not as much as a ladder because really it is just right here. But it is showing that there's an interaction between that spiritual world here and this natural world also here. Is it only on the earth that it is like that? No, because man has gone to the moon, man may eventually get to Mars, we will still be in heaven on earth, which is a spiritual world overlapping a natural world. The principle remains. We are in a spiritual world overlapping a natural world.


55:00 In fact, people have stayed in the International Space Station for months. Still a spiritual world. If you go to the International Space Station, you are praying to God. It's still a spiritual world overlapping a natural world. Very important. What's the composition of our world? Biblical origin and ontology: natural world, spiritual world, angels, and man. Of course, in the natural world there are animals and all that, we're not focused on that. We're talking about the parts that are interacting in this very grand manner. Natural world, spiritual world, angels, and man. Of course, we can say God, but we understand He's the creator of the world, He's not in the world itself, but He relates in the world fully with every person and more so with those who are His. When you get to the full teaching, you will see the role of each of them. All I can do for now is give you a summary. Particularly, I'll just comment on angels. What's the role of angels? Angels were given by God to serve man. Let's just put it like that. I don't want to go into so much detail, but for now, at this level, you need to know that. You should find a teaching on angels in level 3. You need to know the role of angels because sometimes people mix it up, like angels were created par to par with man or above man. No. Angels were created to serve man. One of the vital proofs of angels that man has always discerned by observation and reason is the level of precision to orchestration in our world. I don't think there's anyone that has never experienced that thing where you see an orchestration, you see that this is not normal. How everything was arranged, fitted, and suited to a situation. Like I was talking to some people on a matter, like to the T, to the time, to the minute, to the second, and with funny little details in between. Funny little details that could have changed the course of events just if one of them failed, and everything was arranged to the T for an event. You are like, that is not normal. I have experienced several, and I've also heard several. Something is going on.


Of course, we can generally say well God can do anything. But what I'm trying to say is that we have seen it happen for both good and evil, where someone's life can be arranged to the T for evil. Just happened to be there, happened to be there, this happened, then this, then that, that's how he got into a mess. There is a spiritual intelligence for both good and evil behind the scenes of the events of our world. Like the orchestration of Haman in the book of Esther and the orchestration of Esther in the same material. There's an orchestration of evil that was happening, as much as there's an orchestration of good. Everybody was playing their role. If everybody didn't play their role, the event could have gone another way. The Israelites that went into captivity could have suffered again if they did not play their role. That intelligence is not just in the Bible. You have seen it in real life, in your own life. If I wasn't just here, if someone just prayed, I just happened to be there. I just needed to have been there to hear Uncle Akin that day. He needed to have given me that book, Midas Touch, that day. Any of those details missed might be a different story we are talking about today. Maybe I'll just be somewhere in the US holding a mic, giving a speech about how when we look at the society, we have to change the nations. A useless life. And I'll be so happy making impact. A world that will end. If you are doing it in view of an eternal thing, maybe. But just wastefully. Essentially what protects the devastation, saying we have to preserve the climate and arguing about climate change. Why am I trying to preserve a climate of a world we already know is destined to end? For our children? Someone will still suffer this thing. Because the world is already going like this.


As much as we can survive. Human civilization is worth protecting. What is human civilization worth protecting? All these things people say, they don't even think deeply. And they will say they don't believe in God. Why are you protecting humanity? Just be a nihilist in peace. The composition of our world is a natural world, a spiritual world, angels, and man. We can't go into details on angels here, you'll get to level 3 and understand that. But angels are made, they are the spiritual intelligence behind, and it's both ways. Very important that we are aligned rightly. When we understand the composition, we will see how they are interacting with the reality of God's purpose and how it affects them. God's purpose is sonship. He wants us to have His life, to share His nature. That all terminates on man. Whatever man decides affects everything else in the dynamics of how God made the world, origin and ontology. It affects everything else, including angels. This is so important because in the next summary you'll understand the value of it when we look at sin and its implication. Did sin affect angels? How did it affect them? Why can't the devil be saved again? All those types of questions people ask. We'll get to them very slightly, but you still need the comprehensive teaching for that. But for summary's sake, this is the composition of our world: natural world, spiritual world, angels, and man. You know the natural world. You are living in a spiritual world as well. Events are happening there, majorly orchestrations affecting what we see naturally. How? By angels. And all of this happening all around man.


01:00:00 Angels are meant to serve man. For the sake of angels, maybe I'll give you one text for the sake of summary: Psalm 103 and verse 20-21. Let's just use that one. This is enough for biblical origin and ontology. I think it's fair, the summaries are good enough, at least for this level you should know these things. Angels are created as well. Sometimes they are described with the idea of stars. I know there's an interaction people try to talk about between angels and the state of the world as fallen. But all those issues we cannot discuss them in summary, I might bring them up a bit under sin. Some of these arguments I think may be weak, but we should at least be aware of them. Psalm 103 and verse 20, bless the Lord you His angels who excel in strength. It's just like if you get a servant for your child. You don't want a servant that is like your child. A bodyguard. You don't want a bodyguard that is like your child. That is not a bodyguard, those are friends. You want a bodyguard that can serve your child. Who excel in strength, who do His word. This is so important. Let me read again: bless the Lord you His angels, who excel in strength, who do His word, heeding the voice of His word. Very important, and the question has always been the voice of His word, who voices it? We can't get into so much detail here, you'll see it in level three.


You will hear some things that they will talk about angels also in the exhaustive teaching. You will see the role of man in giving that voice to God's word that angels hearken to. You will see that man plays that place in his authority of the throne of God. He uses the authority of the throne of God, directing the activity of angels. Verse 21 says bless the Lord all you His hosts, you ministers of His who do His pleasure. Bless the Lord all His works in all places of dominion. The idea that angels, like angels of light, the good angels, obey believers whether they tell them to do evil or good is not a very good biblical conclusion. Demons will serve words of darkness like angels will serve the voice of God's word. Even if the voice is a believer's voice for darkness, they will serve it. It is their program. We must be clear on these matters. For summary's sake, that's what we can handle at this point. We'll pick it up in level three, you'll see more on that. There is concerning Satan and demons level three, there's on angels as well level three, you see more on that, and in the exhaustive level five you get more details. I hope this is clear. We bring this to a close. Catch you in the next one, doctrinal summaries number four.


track 5
Sin and Its Implication

00:00 Let us turn our Bibles to Ephesians chapter one. We are looking at a very important subject matter. This is still doctrinal summaries: sin and its implications. Many times we make assumptions about different things in God's word. And one thing that we see is that when we don't have truth, we don't have certainty of truth, we are going to be easily tossed to and fro. That is something that Paul said in Ephesians 4 verse 14. He says that you be no longer children tossed to and fro. He is not talking about children by age; he is talking about spiritual maturity. One way to tell that you are not getting strong and mature spiritually is that you don't have certainty. When you don't have certainty, you are in doubt, you are wandering. It is like being uncertain if someone should ask what is the color of the chair that you are sitting on, and you look at it and you are like, "I'm not too sure." That is because you have not been taught. The moment you have been taught, you are very certain. The color is maybe white, the color is this or that. Whenever we don't have certainty of truth, we are bound to have instability.


This is one of the challenges we face with many believers. They are found having instability in the way they do many things, in the way they pray, in the way they walk with God, in the way they fellowship with Him, because they don't have the certainty of truth. The work of the church is to give us the truth. In Ephesians 4, right after he said in verse 14 that you shouldn't be tossed to and fro, the next verse says the preachers are to speak the truth in love. When they teach us the truth, we are no longer going to be tossed about.


That is what we want to see today. We want to look at what is the truth on sin and its implication. What really is the reason for many of the things that we see today? You remember our study on doctrinal summaries; we are studying this teaching for one reason. Because we have seen that at the point of salvation, you enter into God's purpose for your life. Sometimes people don't answer that part of their life's question very well. If they are asked, "Why are you a Christian?" they say, "Because I don't want to go to hell." Christianity is not just about salvation from sin, death, darkness, and hell. Christianity at its core and at its roots is about why God made you in the first place. God didn't make us to save us, because He didn't make us to be in a problem in the first place. He made us for His purpose. Something went wrong, which is what we are studying today, and He brought us back to His purpose via the redemption that He has accomplished in Christ.


At the point where you get saved, one of the important things you must know is that you are now found in God's purpose for your life. Salvation is that you have now entered into God's purpose. You are not just another face in the crowd. You are not just an entity that exists in this world. There is a purpose that God has for your life. Something about God's purpose is that it is never too early and it is never too late to enter into it. Of course, there is a sense in which we can say it is too late in the sense that someone is finding out late, but at any point where you find out about God's purpose, that is the point God already foreknows you will, and He is planning to work with you from there. The moment you find out about what God's purpose for your life is, it is time for you to align with it. There is a reason that God made you.


Having entered into God's purpose, your major desire and goal should be to fulfill this purpose that God has for you. The only way you can fulfill God's purpose is by growth.


05:00 Let me give an example I've been using. If someone is told, "What I want you to do is to carry these two bags of cement from this place to that second gate," the person looks at it and says, "I can't carry these two bags of cement from this place to that second gate, let's face it." But the person knows that if they go and train, gym, grow, and build themselves to the point where they are able to do that, then they will be able to carry out that purpose. It is the same way with God's purpose. When God gives you His purpose, what He wants you to accomplish, it means there is another goal you must have. You must first have the goal to grow to be able to do that purpose. That is the reason for the church. The church is meant to build you so that you will be able to carry out God's purpose for your life.


The church building us to carry out that purpose is via discipleship. You need to be taught the Word of God, which is exactly what we are looking at today. You need to be taught through the doctrine that Paul has given us. One of the things that Paul says we need to understand if we are going to walk effectively with God is sin and the implication of sin.


Let me take us to the text I'm starting with, Ephesians 1 verse 7. I hope you remember that in Ephesians chapter 3, Paul told us that he had given the summary of the entire doctrine of Christ in Ephesians 1. In this summary of the doctrine, I want you to notice what he said. "In Him we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace, which He made to abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence." We have redemption, which is the forgiveness of sins. What Christ has accomplished is because there is first a problem called sin or sins. The reason for what Christ had to do is because of the problem called sin.


The way many of us think about sin is that bad thing that someone is doing. You are not supposed to do that bad thing, that is a sin. That is true, there is that understanding of sin. But the primary understanding of sin in God's Word is not like that. That is an effect. If we say what is sin according to what God's Word teaches us, there are two things that will be primary. The first thing we need to know about sin is that sin just means a state or a thing that is contrary to what ought to be. In the Greek, as well as in the Hebrew, the word sin means to miss the mark. Let's say someone puts a target: shoot that arrow and it must touch this target. What is sin? Sin is any shot you make that does not touch that target. Because the person has given you what you must do, anything besides what the person told you to do is sin, it is contrary to the target that the person has given you. Any situation or condition contrary to what someone originally expects is sin.


If you look at our world, our world is in a state that is contrary to what God expects. Our world is in a state of sin. For example, in our world we are seeing death. And yet in the same world we are seeing life. If you think about life and death, death can only happen because there is first life. Let's use light and darkness. You can only have darkness because there is first light.


10:00 It is when the light goes that you are going to see darkness. If you see a dead lizard and someone says, "That lizard is dead, what happened?" The only reason why you are feeling bad for the lizard is because the lizard had life. If you go and buy a toy lizard, nobody can say that lizard is dead, because it never had life. You just say that toy is non-living. The presence of death means there must first have been life. The life has gone, that is why you are seeing death. Death itself is describing sin, a condition that is not the original. Darkness as well is describing sin or the condition that sin brings, which is that there is initially light, but the light has gone, so we are seeing darkness.


When we talk about sin, sin is any condition or even action that is contrary to what is originally intended or expected. We can bring it to action. If someone does something evil or bad, you say, "No, that's not the way people are supposed to behave." Maybe someone speaks evil of another person, and you say, "No, that's not the way we should behave, we should be kindhearted, we should be good." What you did is contrary to what is expected. That's the way the scripture explains sin.


When we look at our world today, we see the condition of sin in the world in three ways. Number one, people believe falsehood. There is the truth they are supposed to believe, but people are believing something else. There are those who believe there is no God. That's falsehood. There are those who think they can do whatever they like. That's falsehood. The fact that people can believe falsehood shows something has gone wrong with our world. This is not the way things should be. The truth is what is expected, but we are seeing falsehood. The second way we see sin is in morality, what people do, the conduct of people. Someone steals, someone lies, someone kills. That person is doing contrary to what should have been done. So it is a condition of sin.


The third way that we see sin in this world is in nature, the nature of the world itself. That's why we can have sickness and disease in this world. All of these are contrary to what should be there originally. Health is what is expected in our world. Life is what is expected, but sickness can happen. Something has gone wrong with the world itself, showing us that sin is what is dominant, is what is reigning, is what is playing out in this world.


Then we must ask a question: how can sin be playing out in the world when what is originally intended is life, is light, is good? Life must be there first before we can see death. Light must be there first before we can see darkness. So why are we seeing a situation where there is death, where there is darkness, where there is evil in the world? What happened that led to that? That's what we want to look at in this teaching.


How am I supposed to think about sin? Many of us personalize sin too quickly. We think sin is about us and how bad we are, rather than sin being about the problem that is affecting us. We personalize sin too quickly. We are living in a world where there is sin in beliefs, in moral conduct, and in nature. We are seeing sin around us, not just in what people are doing. Whether people do anything or not, we are still seeing sin around us. We are seeing it in nature. We are seeing it in the things people believe. We are also seeing it in the things that people do. How come there is sin in this world?


I will give us two answers. The first answer is a philosophical answer, then the second one is a biblical and revelatory answer. The moment you see sin, or you see another example of sin—death or darkness—it should already tell you how come the darkness is happening. If you see death, it should already tell you how come there is such a thing that is dead. Because the moment I see death, it means this thing first had life, and the life has gone. Either someone took the life away, the life went away on its own, something happened that took the life away, and so that is why I am seeing death. If I am seeing darkness, it means there was first light. Something happened taking the light away, and therefore I am seeing darkness. That means if we are seeing sin in our world, evil in our world, in the conduct of people, in the nature of the world, it means there was initially the state of good, the state of light, the state of life. The original state of things could not have been like this. It also means something has happened that has pushed back that original nature, which is why we are now seeing this contradiction in the world.


That is the philosophical answer. It is something that God expects you to be able to know just by thinking about it. It is why Paul said that those who are suppressing the truth in unrighteousness, they are deliberately not believing the gospel. He is saying the evidence of the gospel is that something has gone wrong in our world. There is righteousness, but now we are seeing unrighteousness. It should be obvious to them this is not how things were meant to be originally, so they should believe in redemption.


15:00 This one is the revelatory and biblical answer. We are saying that the only way we can see the condition of sin, the condition of death, the condition of darkness is that there was first life and light and goodness and righteousness, but it went away for one reason or the other. Maybe someone pushed it back, maybe someone rejected it, maybe something happened. We need to find out, how did we arrive at this condition? Romans chapter 5 verse 12. Paul speaking says, "Therefore, just as through one man sin entered the world..." He is giving us a revelatory explanation beyond just the philosophical, rational explanation that something must have happened that took life away. He is now saying it was because of one man that sin entered the world.


Notice that he said sin entered the world. In the Greek, which is the language that Paul wrote, that word entered means to enter into. This means sin was not in the world before; it entered. How could sin enter the world if God created everything? Does it also mean that God created sin, but then it was not in the world? Where was it? Was it now with Him? If there was only God, then God created the world, so was sin hiding somewhere, then later it now entered into the world? The answer is no.


When we say sin entered into the world, one of the explanations we use to make it clear to us is that before sin entered the world, there was the possibility of sin, but there wasn't the reality of sin. Imagine God created the world and there was no salt at all. But we know today that salt is sodium chloride. That means it is formed from sodium and chlorine. So imagine God did not create salt at all, but God created sodium and put it somewhere, and God created chlorine and put it somewhere. Let's say God put all the sodium in Africa and all the chlorine in Europe. Someone says there is no salt in this world. But there is the possibility of salt. There is no reality of salt yet. If they bring the sodium and the chlorine together, then salt has entered into the world, but before then there was the possibility of salt in the world. It is the same way when God made the world. God did not make sin. But there is the possibility of sin.


20:00 Let's see the biblical account of sin. We have seen the philosophical one: sin is something contrary to what is originally intended, and we are seeing it in our beliefs, in morality, in the nature of the world. But how did this come about? "Therefore, just as through one man sin entered the world, and death through sin." Because of this sin, death has entered, and thus death spread to all men because all sinned. That means there is this one situation done by one man that has brought in sin and death into the world. There is this one act of sin by one man that has brought in death and darkness into the world. Man is the entity responsible for sin's entrance into the world. He is the only entity capable of that.


The real question at this juncture is, what did man do that brought sin into the world? The reason why this is important is that when you know what man did that brought sin into the world, you know what to do to have God's righteousness. Usually people will say a man sinned. What sin? Is it lying, stealing, fornication? No. What was the sin that man did that has rendered the world in the way it is? Let us go to Genesis chapter 2 to notice what the primary sin in this world is.


We have said that sin is evident in our world, all of us can see it. There is a contrary reality to that which God wants that we are seeing in this world. Now we are explaining how that sin happened. Sin is not a reality God made; it is a possibility from the world that God had made. We are going to see the setup that existed that was the possibility of sin that brought about the reality of sin.


Go all the way to verse 7 in Genesis 2. "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." God made man. At this point, man is someone that can reason; he is a rational agent. Then what did God do to man? Look at verse 8. "The Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there He put the man whom He had formed. And out of the ground the Lord God made every tree grow that is pleasant to the sight and good for food." Man is in a garden, and God planted every tree. It makes sense to us, because in a garden there will be trees, and they are pleasant to the sight and good for food, so we are imagining there is mango, orange, watermelon, many beautiful trees.


The problem starts after that text. The next statement says, "The tree of life was also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil." There is no tree of knowledge that we have ever seen before. You don't see a tree and say, "This tree is a tree of knowledge." Trees are material things. Knowledge is not a material thing. Knowledge belongs in the domain of the mind. Even if it is knowing about something material, the knowledge itself is in the mind. When it says He planted a tree of knowledge, we know you are not talking about natural or physical things anymore. What you are talking about exists on the mind. The first one just told us tree of life. But the second one said tree of the knowledge of good and evil. What is the tree of life? What is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil?


25:00 The Bible explains the tree of life clearest to us in the book of Proverbs chapter 3. We have said all of us are seeing sin in the world. We can explain that this sin must have happened because what was first has gone. Therefore, we are seeing the absence of what was first. We are seeing the absence of light, absence of life. What exactly happened that brought about this absence of life and light? We are seeing the account being explained to us, first by Paul, now in Genesis. It has to do with this tree of life and tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and they are definitely not physical trees. One of the challenges we have today is that people interpret this as a literal tree in the garden, and that man took the literal tree. People will say man took that apple. I don't even know what started this whole apple business. They say it is the apple that man took, and he ate it, then we now have Adam's apple. But Eve was the first person to eat it, so where is Eve's apple?


Let's see Proverbs chapter 3 and verse 13. It says, "Happy is the man who finds wisdom, and the man who gains understanding; for her proceeds are better than the profits of silver, and her gain than fine gold." Let's go to Proverbs 23 verse 23. It says, "Buy the truth, and do not sell it, also wisdom and instruction and understanding." In many translations, the words "it" and "also" are italicized, meaning they were added by the translators to aid reading. If we remove them to test the meaning: "Buy the truth, and sell not wisdom, instruction, and understanding." That means when you buy the truth, what you have is wisdom, instruction, and understanding.


Truth is something that is the case, whether anybody is there to know it or not. Assuming there is no human being in the world, and my phone is on this pulpit. The truth is that my phone is on the pulpit, but nobody is there to know it. But the moment someone is there to know it, the person says, "There is a phone on this pulpit." The person has gotten knowledge, wisdom, understanding of that truth. When you receive truth, what you have is wisdom, instruction, understanding. Instruction is usually because somebody is going to teach you to know the truth.


Remember what we were reading earlier, Proverbs 3:13. It said, "Happy is the man who finds wisdom." What is the root of wisdom? Buy the truth. Buy the truth and do not sell wisdom, instruction, understanding. Wisdom is about the truth, the understanding of truth. It says, "Happy is the man that finds wisdom, the man that gains understanding. Her proceeds are better than the profits of silver, and her gain than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies, and all the things you may desire cannot compare with her. Length of days is in her right hand, in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace." Now verse 18: "She is a tree of life to those who take hold of her, and happy are all who retain her."


What did he call a tree of life? Wisdom. What is the root of wisdom? Truth. What did God present to man in the garden? The tree of life. What is the tree of life? Wisdom. What is the root of wisdom? Truth. God presented to man in the garden the truth. I give you the knowledge of it. And when you understand it, what do you have? Wisdom. God put on man's heart the knowledge of the truth. What was the opposing thing that was on man's heart? The knowledge of good and evil, something that was rejecting the truth: falsehood. The tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil are not physical trees in a physical garden. They are in the heart of man, what God has sown to the heart of man. This is the truth about life, about this world. Remember that the gospel itself is called the truth. Ephesians 1:13: "In Him you also trusted, after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation." The gospel is called the truth.


30:00 What God presented to man at the beginning is the truth about life. He is telling man, "I am God, I am the one that created the world, and this is the reason why I made you." But man can say it is a lie, nobody created the world, we are just here, I am going to decide what I want to do. That is exactly what man did. He wanted to be his own god, rejected the idea of a god, and decided his own wisdom about how the world is. What led to sin and death and darkness? What we see brought about sin, death, and darkness is that man rejected God's truth and God's purpose. We are seeing the setup that existed, the possibility of sin that brought about the reality of sin.


Are the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil physical trees? No. Because they are about knowledge. The two trees are about knowledge. They were on the mind of man. It is about what God was telling man that man can accept or reject. It is not an apple, it is not a mango. It is using a figurative description. It is like the serpent issue. The serpent is not literal. There was no literal serpent talking to man. What it is showing us is the reality of man functioning in a spiritual world and in a natural world. In the spiritual world there is interaction with angels, which happens throughout the Bible. There is interaction with non-physical beings. One of them that became a rebel was later described as a serpent. What they were thinking about was also something that bothered those entities as well. Just like the serpent is not literal, the tree as well is not literal. Not everything is literal.


Notice Genesis 2 verse 15. "Then the Lord God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to tend and keep it. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, 'Of every tree of the garden you may freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die.'" He is telling him, eat all the natural trees. Eat only one spiritual tree. Don't eat this other spiritual tree. They are not physical trees in the garden, but pointing to his mind: I planted the truth on your heart, but there is also falsehood. Eat only one of the trees. What was God offering man? He called it life. God was offering man His purpose. God's purpose is that He wants man to be in His image, He wants man to be His child, He wants man to be His son. He was offering that purpose to man.


35:00 The first act of sin was man rejecting the truth and God's purpose. The first act of sin was not man stealing, man lying, man doing anything. It is man rejecting the truth and God's purpose. That is the very first act of sin that man did. The truth about existence, the truth about life, rejecting God's purpose is the very first act of sin that man did. How did he reject it? He did not believe it. He spoke contrary to it.


Let's look at Proverbs chapter 18. How did man reject God's purpose of life? When we say sin and its implication, what sin is at its core is the rejection of God's truth and purpose. If you say, "I am born again, I have received the gospel, the truth is now on my heart. I'm no longer in sin," one of the core things we are going to see when you are no longer in sin is that you have received God's purpose for your life. If you are still living your life independent of God's purpose, you are still sinning, even though you are saved from damnation. God's purpose is what defines righteousness at its core. God made you for a life to walk in His light. He made you with an assignment He wants you to do. If you are living your life independent of God's purpose, then you are still walking in sin. It is very critical for you as a believer to find out God's purpose.


Proverbs 18:20 says, "A man's stomach shall be satisfied from the fruit of his mouth; from the produce of his lips he shall be filled." Does your mouth produce any physical fruit? No. It is saying what your mouth produces are words. Your stomach will be satisfied by the fruit of your mouth, and from the produce of your lips you shall be filled. Look at verse 21: "Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and those who love it will eat its fruit." When they believe either the truth or falsehood, they are going to speak it. The fruit of their mouth, words, the produce of their lips, they will speak it, and by so doing they will eat it. Speaking is the eating.


What man did at the beginning is he rejected God's purpose. He didn't believe it. He heard it, he thought about it, he understood what He was saying, but he was like, "Maybe this is not it." And he spoke in that way: "I don't really believe there's any God. I don't really think there's anything to this thing." By speaking in that way, he put himself under the conditions of death. We have seen very clearly what sin is. Sin at its core is rejecting God's truth and His purpose. The truth that God told you: I want you to have my life and walk as my child, and function as my heir where I'm assigning things to you to do, and doing those things faithfully. The truth that God has told you, you are not faithful to it. This is important because sometimes we joke with God's purpose, our natural assignments just as much as our spiritual assignments. You see people doing their natural assignments as heirs of God in God's purpose as if it's just their work. Your natural work, your career, your business, you are just doing it as if it's your work. The things you are supposed to do, you are not taking them seriously, like you are the one that just decided to be on earth.


40:00 Taking your natural assignment seriously is not a matter of your personal ambition alone; it is a matter of God's purpose. I must do my part faithfully on earth. Whatever has been assigned to me, whatever He has put in my hands, whatever privilege I have in skill, in knowledge, I must do it faithfully, diligently, properly. God will judge that natural assignment and He will judge your spiritual assignment. It is sin not to do God's purpose.


Why are we seeing a world where there is sin? Because man rejected God's purpose. Not because God created sin. What did God create? Free will and His purpose. That is the sodium and the chlorine. If you use the sodium and the chlorine rightly, it will lead to the right thing. If you use it wrongly, it can lead to something explosive. God didn't create the reality of sin, but the possibility of sin. Man rejected God's purpose. The same free will could have accepted God's purpose and the conditions of our world would be different.


When we are witnessing the conditions of sin, death, and darkness, we are seeing that man has rejected God's purpose. What is the effect of man rejecting God's purpose? We are looking at the implications of sin. Sin is not primarily stealing, lying, fornication, cheating. Those things are the effects of sin. When you reject God's purpose, you reject God's life, you are going to walk in the flesh. You walk in darkness, you walk in death. Those will be the effects. The primary thing is you have rejected God's truth and purpose. When you accept God's truth and His purpose, you have His nature; you will now be able to walk in righteousness. Many times people are trying not to sin to get what God wants to give them, but it doesn't work like that. God has to give you what He wants to give you for you not to walk in sin. What is sin itself? It is rejecting what God is giving you. Sin is not, "I am doing something wrong, so God cannot give me what He wants." Sin is, "I have rejected what God wants to give me that will make me start doing things that are wrong." Righteousness is, "I have accepted what God wants, and therefore I can walk the way God wants me to walk."


When you see sin affecting you, it is because of the problem in the world. Maybe you are just on your own, but because of the influence of the world, the influence of sin in the world, seen in our songs, in our movies, you just find that sometimes you just get angry. Unrighteous anger. If someone is trying to kill a baby, you should be angry. That is righteous anger to stop evil. But you are just angry, not in righteousness. You are just walking in the flesh in one regard or the other. It is the effect of sin on you that you have to now resist. Since you have received God's life, you have to say, "No, I'm not like this. I'm righteous. I'm a new creation." Because you believe what God says you are, when you are standing in faith on who you are, you are strengthening the truth of righteousness to walk in it.


Sin entered the world because man rejected God's purpose. It has certain effects. It affects our morality, which is why sometimes we walk in the flesh. Even now that we are born again, the influence is still around. The nature is gone for us. We no longer have that nature of sin. What are the implications of sin? When man rejected God's purpose, Romans 5 verse 12 tells us the very first thing that happened is that sin and death became the authority of the world. The authority or the reign of sin and death became the primary condition of our world. Romans 6 verse 14 says, "Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under law but under grace." Sin is being used as someone that has authority and is trying to rule. They are personifying sin as someone that has authority, rulership, dominion. This is the authority that the devil now takes hold of. He takes the authority of death to reign. Man did not automatically give authority to the devil. Man, by rejecting God's purpose, made sin an authority. The devil now takes advantage of that to be the lord under sin.


45:00 Man has brought in the reign of sin, of death, and of darkness. That is why Colossians 1:13 says Jesus has delivered us from the authority of darkness and has translated us into the kingdom of His Son. He has taken us out of the authority of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of His Son. There is the reign of darkness, and there is the reign of life.


What else is the implication of sin? It said sin entered the world and death by sin. Where do we see death? In the nature of the world. Sin has affected the material world. The first thing that man's act of sin did was to bring about the authority or the reign of sin, death, and darkness. The first thing that authority did is to affect the material world. There is corruption in creation because of sin. Romans 8 talks about that. Ephesians 6 tells us there is wickedness in the spirit world because of sin. Ephesians 6 verse 12 says, "We do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this age, against spiritual wickedness in the heavenly places." The way heaven is often taught is as the spiritual world that overlaps the natural one. There is God's heaven, which is His throne, and the church. But heaven as a whole is the spiritual world overlapping the natural world. That's why angels are described with the stars of heaven, and those angels include both good and bad ones. There is now wickedness and corruption in the heavenlies. It is also why Jesus told us that He went to cleanse the heavens. He went to make it possible that in the spiritual world, we can now become part of God's house.


Sin affected the natural world, sin affected the spiritual world. What else did sin affect? Sin affected angels. Second Peter chapter 2. We are now told that there are angels who sinned. The angels they are talking about here are the ones that we now call the angels of the devil, or demons. Second Peter chapter 2 and verse 4: "For if God did not spare the angels who sinned..." Even the angels that did not sin that he didn't mention here, those angels were also affected by sin, which means the work of redemption that Jesus did had to bring them out of the corruption that affected them in the spiritual realm. If redemption was not done, all of them would have perished under the reign of sin and death that man had brought into the world. They themselves needed to be elect or made holy via what Christ did. It is on the premise of redemption they are called elect angels or holy angels. Sin affected them for redemption to affect them. Sin has affected the natural world, the spiritual world, and the angels.


Lastly, sin affected man. Sin affects man in three ways. First, man is under the reign or dominion of sin, death, and darkness. When human beings are born, they are not born sinners by actions. Whether you sin or not, you are under the dominion of sin. You are a slave of sin even when you have not sinned. If you were born into a family in Israel when they were under slavery in Egypt, you are a slave, not because of anything you did, but just because of your status. The fact that you are born into the family of slaves makes you a slave. Someone is born into this world; the person is not a sinner by nature or by actions yet, but the person is yet a slave of sin by dominion. The fact that sin is the one reigning means you are under sin's reign. The idea that being born as a newborn child means you are free from sin is not true.


50:00 You are free from sin by nature, and you are also not a sinner by conduct, but you are not free from sin relative to dominion or authority. You are under that reign and dominion and authority. This is why a child can be born sick. That is the effect of sin. That is why the child is already born mortal as well. The child is suffering an effect of sin having not sinned because it is a matter of dominion. We are not saying that if that child dies before reaching the age where they can believe, the child is going to hell. The Bible says he that believes not will be damned. Someone that could not believe or not cannot be damned. The verdict for damnation is not "he that never believed," but "he that believed not at the hearing of the gospel." He that did not accept the gospel that was presented to him is the one that will be damned. Not someone that never had the opportunity.


It's like saying someone that had a mental issue throughout their life is going to perish because they couldn't believe. It is when the person did not believe at all upon the presentation of the gospel that the person is damned. But it doesn't change the fact that the person was under sin. Redemption would avail that person since the person could not believe, the same way redemption avails creation itself.


Sin affects man. Man is under a spiritual reign of sin. That is the first effect of sin. We all experienced that immediately. Number two, man has a physical effect of sin. Man has mortality. Apart from mortality, man is susceptible to sickness and disease. Number three, when man reaches the age of rationality, that man is going to have the spiritual nature and conduct of sin. He will have the flesh. Romans 7:9 says, "I was alive once without the law, but when the commandment came, sin revived and I died." At the point of birth, the person is not yet by nature a sinner. But once the person reaches the age of accountability, as long as this dominion of sin is in this world, the person is going to sin and have that nature of sin. The person is going to align with sin.


55:00 The first thing that we saw is we can all see sin in the world, in our beliefs, morality, and in nature. That sin implies that there was the original thing that has gone, the contradiction. There was originally life, we are seeing death. Originally light, we are seeing darkness. Originally good, we are now seeing evil. What caused it? It is because man rejected God's truth and purpose. We saw the effect of that. It has brought about a spiritual dominion and authority that now affects the material world through corruption; the spiritual world through wickedness; the angels, some have sinned, some are now called elect or holy. It affected man in three ways: man is under the dominion of it, it affects man physically, and also spiritually in nature.


What is the final implication of sin on God? Sin affects the world, so it doesn't have any implication on God as a person, but it affects God's purpose. The implication of sin on God, in terms of affecting His purpose, is that God responds to sin with the promise of redemption. Immediately man sinned, He said, "Where are you?" And they were hiding. The man said, "The woman whom you gave to me has done this." The woman said, "It is the serpent that caused it." The Lord told the serpent, "Because you have done this, you are cursed." The curse was not God's initiative but the very effect of what he did. Even God didn't curse man. What man did put man in a cursed state.


One of the challenges we face today in the faith of Christ is that believers are usually moved a lot by testimonies that affect their doctrinal persuasion. There is one I heard, where someone did a charm and it affected some believers, but one was not affected and was able to help the others. As good as that testimony is, it is a problem. Why were those believers affected at all? The explanation they gave was because one had covered themselves with the blood of Jesus. It implies that if the others also said "I cover myself with the blood of Jesus," they wouldn't have been affected. That is a superstitious approach to faith.


If you start teaching things like that, what then is the essence of faith in God's word? As a believer you must be clear: things of death and darkness cannot affect me. I have left the reign of sin. It is not possible. You are giving more strength and power to the enemy by thinking otherwise. People put themselves in a cursed state by what they believe and therefore they are exposed to certain things. A believer must be bold. We shouldn't give such room to the enemy.


What has God given us? The promise of redemption. Immediately after man sinned, God gave the promise of the Redeemer. He said, "In pain you shall bring forth the Child or the Son," pointing to the generation of the Christ. Your desire shall be for your husband, talking about a demand for the Christ. When Eve gave birth to Cain, she said, "I have obtained a man from the Lord." They were expecting someone because God gave them the promise of redemption. When Cain killed Abel, she gave birth to Seth and said, "The Lord has appointed me another seed." They were expecting a seed because God gave them the promise of redemption. God's response to sin is that He promised redemption.


The understanding we must have of sin is that man messed up, but God promised redemption. Now we can say God has fulfilled redemption in Christ. I am going to wrap up for now with this part of our doctrinal summary, sin and its implication. Sin is about the rejection of God's truth and God's purpose. When we receive redemption in Christ Jesus, we know it is not just redemption for redemption's sake. It is redemption back into God's purpose for your life. You must find out God's purpose for your life. You have a part on this earth to play. Do not fail to play your role.


track 6
God’s Wisdom toward Redemption


00:00 All right brothers and sisters, we are looking at God's wisdom towards redemption. Let me remind us of everything we are seeing generally. We said after we receive salvation and we enter into God's purpose for our lives, our greatest desire is that we want to fulfill that purpose that God has for us. But when you want to fulfill a purpose, you first need to be developed, to be mature, to grow to the point where you are able to do that purpose.


I'll use the example we have been using. If someone tells you to carry two bags of cement, which is pretty heavy for almost everybody, and carry it from here to a 500-meter distance, and you must not drop it. You carry that bag of cement once and walk a 500-meter distance and drop it there. You're like, oh boy, I don't think I can do this yet. Because of that purpose that the person has given you, your first assignment is to build yourself to the point where you are now able to do that purpose. You carry the two bags of cement because you have built yourself and carry it all the way that 500-meter distance and then you drop it. If you don't build yourself, you will fail in that purpose. If God gives you a purpose, your first goal must be growth.


That's what He tells us in God's word. When Jesus saves us and brings us to His purpose, He says, you guys need to be discipled. He said, go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father, Son, Holy Ghost. Get them saved, then teach them to observe all things I've commanded you. Remember that the Lord Jesus said that when you are discipled, you will become as the master. He said, a disciple cannot be more than his master, but he that is perfectly trained will be as his master. He's telling us that you need the stature, you need the build, you need the level of growth that the master has to do His assignment for you.


What I like about what Jesus said in Luke chapter 6 and verse 40, is that Paul used the same word in Ephesians 4:12. He said, Jesus gave the leaders of the church to perfect the saints. The same word, katartismos. The reason for the church is to build you to become like the master. He gave them to perfect the saints till we come to the perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. The build, the growth that God wants you to have to fulfill God's purpose will happen to you in the church.


Another thing Paul told us is that growth is going to happen to us by knowledge. We need the knowledge of God's word to grow and be strong the way He wants us to be. Go to Ephesians chapter 3 and verse 1. "For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you Gentiles, if indeed you have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which was given to me for you, how that by revelation He has made known to me the mystery, as I have briefly written already." That means the earlier part of this material, Paul is saying that the revelation God gave to me, I've written it to you in this earlier part of the document. Now see verse 4. "By which when you read, you will understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ." He has made it clear to them so that when they go and read it, they will understand. The same thing is true about us. When we go and read it, we'll understand the knowledge or the wisdom that God gave to Paul.


That's what we were reading earlier, Ephesians chapter 1. What did Paul receive from God? One of the things we saw is that the knowledge and understanding that Paul received relates with redemption from sin. We studied sin first, to understand what sin is in God's word. We saw that sin is not just random acts of wrongdoing. Sin at its core is rejecting God's truth and purpose, which renders the world in a state that is contrary to God's life, that is contrary to God's light. I want us to read Ephesians 1 from verse 7 downwards to verse 9 again. Ephesians 1:7 says, in Him, talking about Jesus, we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace. Today, we know that we have redemption in Christ, via what Christ has done, according to the riches of God's grace. But now look at verse 8. He said, which He made to abound towards us. That means the way God brought that redemption to pass was via His wisdom and prudence. It means that before redemption happened, God had to work it out by His wisdom, by His prudence for that redemption to happen.


05:00 Let me explain the word wisdom and prudence again. Wisdom means clarity. I used to teach from the book of Proverbs that there are seven steps in the journey of wisdom. In any area of life, if you are going to have wisdom, you must understand the seven steps in the journey of wisdom. The first one is truth. On any matter that you need wisdom, there's already the truth about that matter. Let's use an example. If someone is saying, I want to know how to make money. There's already the truth about how to make money. Whether you know it or not does not change the fact that there is the truth about how to make money. Let's say someone wants to multiply money in investment. There's also the truth about how to multiply money. Let's say someone wants to make a particular phone, maybe an iPhone 17 Pro Max. There's the truth about how to make it. There's the exact process that was followed by the manufacturers. There's the truth about it. But the person needs the knowledge of it.


The truth about it already exists, but you need the knowledge of that truth. The second step in wisdom is knowledge. The third step, you need instruction. You are going to get that knowledge by instruction. Someone will tell it to you. There's the truth about how to make the phone, there's the knowledge of it, someone gives that knowledge to you by instruction. What do you get as they are giving you instruction? You are getting understanding. It starts to make sense to you. You are putting it together. The moment you have completed your understanding, what that is called is wisdom. The state where that matter is very clear to you. If it's about how to make a car, someone shows you exactly how to do it. Once the person has explained it, you now know how to make that car completely. They will say you are wise. The person has wisdom on this matter. He understands it very well. What he now needs to do is to be doing further research. But about how this thing operates, he understands it.


Step one is truth. Step two is knowledge. Step three is instruction. Step four is understanding. Step five is counsel. The moment someone knows how to make a car completely, if you tell the person that car is sounding like this, because they have been taught and have understood it, they can give you counsel. Once you have wisdom, you can counsel others. If someone that doesn't have wisdom should give you counsel, you will suffer in this world. If someone has limited wisdom, a degree of understanding, and the person is now giving you counsel beyond their knowledge, you will suffer. That's why you must be discerning.


Number seven is prudence. You get counsel. One thing is that the person gives you counsel, it's another thing that you follow the counsel. When you follow the counsel exactly, that's what the Bible calls prudence. By the time it tells us that God has fulfilled redemption by His wisdom and prudence, it is so important because this is where people struggle with understanding the Bible. They are like, human beings were the ones doing what they were doing, how did everything lead to Christ? What is God's role here? There is the carefulness of God's wisdom and prudence that brought about the fulfillment of redemption. If we do not read the Bible prudently, knowing that what we are reading is God's wisdom and prudence to fulfill redemption, we will be misinterpreting events. They are not reading it seeing His wisdom and prudence through the events that have happened to bring about redemption. That's why we call it God's wisdom towards redemption. Reading the account of the Old Testament text accurately, wisely, prudently, to see exactly how God fulfilled redemption.


10:00 Some people have a bad reading of the scriptures. They don't understand how the events were happening. They sometimes impute on God what is not true about Him. Some of the things we are talking about in this teaching, we have already talked about them in the teaching of God, where we were talking about the sovereignty of God, which is a subject matter that is often misinterpreted. Sometimes people say God is sovereign. God is sovereign means He can do anything He wants to do. It does not mean He is doing everything He can do. God could have made the world in such a way that nobody has free will. He could do just about anything He wants to do. But that reality of His sovereignty does not mean He is doing anything that He can do. There is something He is doing Himself. He is not doing everything that He can do. He is doing something specifically and we need to find out. Sovereignty means He can do anything He wants to do. This is where we need to understand God's wisdom and prudence.


If we are told, how do I understand the Old Testament text? You must know that the goal is truth. If God was working out His wisdom and prudence, the root of wisdom, the root of prudence is truth. There's this problem that particularly critical scholars like to do. They'll say these people are just doing apologetics for God, that if you read the text, the authors meant this and that's what they said. That is not discerning God's wisdom and prudence through the text. There are three things I want you to note when you are approaching the Old Testament text. God's wisdom towards redemption is our reading of the Old Testament text to read God's wisdom and prudence in it. Sometimes people read the Old Testament text and say, God supports slavery. God even supports genocide. People will go there and they will read that. And here, Paul is saying that God labored through the conditions in His wisdom and prudence to bring about redemption. There will have been things you will be reading that will look strange. But it is God laboring with His wisdom amidst the situation to fulfill redemption.


You are not meant to have read God supporting slavery there. You are not meant to have read God condoning genocide there. If you were reading with the goal of truth, which is this is God's wisdom playing out here, despite the imperfections I'm seeing. If you are reading with the goal of truth, that it is God's wisdom, things may look weird there, but it is God's wisdom playing out. You won't have been seeing the wrong things there. The most common one when people see issues in scripture, what God points their minds to is the issue of morality. We are using the example of slavery, the example of genocide, even many things in the law that just allow them to kill people. Or sometimes people say even God telling Abraham to go and sacrifice his child. What kind of God is this? If you start talking like that, are you saying God can just tell somebody today to go and kill the Canaanites, the way He said Saul should go and kill the Amalekites? You need to understand the play of His wisdom and prudence at that time.


15:00 Let's use the example of morality. Morality has five steps in it. We have taught this in the teaching "The Truth of Morality". This means Paul's reading of the Old Testament is that he was reading God's wisdom and prudence. If you want to go by way of critical scholarship to read the Bible, you can't even read it like Jesus read it, let alone Paul. They have a point if we are not careful. When I say we should read it with God's wisdom and prudence, I'm not granting liberty to read it any which way. I'm saying we must read it with the mind of truth. We are reading it in the mind of truth on all levels. The people that were writing, they wanted to say the truth. God who orchestrated them to write wants to reflect the truth. We that are reading it, we must read it to see the truth. Which means that even the people that were writing, sometimes what they were saying was not exactly the truth on that matter, despite their intention to write the truth. They wrote their mind like that and God allowed it. God Himself that orchestrated this still wants to reflect His truth, we must still now read it with truth.


Morality has five things we must know. Number one, there is moral truth. Number two, there is moral intention. Number three, there is moral instruction. Number four, there is moral expression. Number five, there is moral outcome. If there's moral truth, this is how something is. Someone may not fully get moral truth, but have an intention to do the thing that is moral. This is the moral truth that we can see in the world and also in God's word: life is right and death is wrong. Light is right and darkness is wrong. Our moral intention is I want there to be life.


Let me give an example. When God gave Moses the Ten Commandments, it was a reflection of moral truth. He was giving him things that would bring about life. Moses now gave them the 613 laws, which are moral instructions based on his intention to see moral truth fulfilled, to see life. God has told him moral truth: life is right, death is wrong. He gave commandments in that light. With that intention, he gave further instructions, which he is going to claim is the Lord giving because he's giving it based on moral truth. It is not like that to say it is the Lord giving it. It's human beings saying it's the Lord giving it. What is from the Lord clearly is the moral truth. You will see instances where we will say it is the one that now had to speak to them, not the Lord. Yet they will still sometimes talk about those laws and say it is the Lord that said so, because they believe they are giving moral instructions based on moral truth, which is of the Lord.


Moses can give a moral instruction based on the moral intention that there should be life, that if someone is a murderer, kill the person, so that the person is not going to bring about death. The moral truth is life. The moral intention is life. Yet a moral instruction can tell you to kill because of the moral outcome of life. This is where the issue of wisdom and prudence comes in. Based on the wisdom that I have, that what God wants morally is life, I can counsel you to do something like this, so that there will be life. What I'm counseling you can look weird to somebody else if they don't understand. I can counsel people that are in a state of slavery and say, don't do all these things. It's not because what I've said is exactly moral truth at its best expression, but I'm still mitigating with moral truth a whole lot of things that are wrong. If we do not read the Old Testament text as God's wisdom and prudence towards redemption, we will be misreading it. We won't be reading God's intention in the text.


20:00 When we are reading the Old Testament text, number one, we must have the goal of truth. Number two, we must understand the place of human and natural means in receiving revelation and codifying it, despite divine orchestration amidst it. We must understand the place of human and natural means, that someone can make a mistake in receiving revelation and in writing it, despite God's orchestration that was there. The third thing in reading the Old Testament text is that we must have a proper understanding of literature, language, and history.


For example, Genesis 1:1 to Genesis 1:11 is highly figurative. It's a history that is very figurative. It's not literal like that. That's why you are seeing people living 900 and something years. Scientifically, human beings have never lived 900 and something years. That's why you will read in that account that the world started 6,000 years ago. Scientifically, human beings have been existing far earlier than 6,000 years ago. At least 10,000 years. In some cases, 30,000 years. Some people can even go further and say the humans that the Bible is discussing can be taken as far as 100,000, some 400,000 years before. If you want to include the Neanderthals, there are certain Christian philosophers and theologians that will say the Neanderthals are part of the people in the likeness of God. That account is figurative. We must understand the place of literature, language, and history. This is a figurative writing. We must know when this is a poem. We must know when this is a narrative. We must be able to make such distinctions.


That's the first thing I will tell us about approaching the study of the Old Testament text, which is God's wisdom towards redemption. We must approach it carefully. When we approach the study of God's wisdom towards redemption with this careful background, notice that there is the goal of truth, which shows us that we are doing very strong philosophical theology whenever we are reading the Old Testament text. We must know the rules of the truth. God is light, He can't do darkness. God is life, He can't do death. It just doesn't make any sense. Light cannot be giving darkness. The way in which I can account for God doing darkness must be well defined. That means He has taken His light away. Not that He has brought in darkness Himself. He has taken His life away, which is death. Not that He has killed like that. If the goal is truth, I must be ready to do very strong philosophical theology.


There are a couple of things I want to say here when you are reading the Old Testament text. They are very important for you to know. When we read through the Old Testament text, reading God's wisdom and prudence, reading it through the lenses of truth, we will realize that God has set up the world and the way it works. It is God that even set up how death happens. If you reject life, you will die. That means even when death happens or evil things happen, you can still say God caused it, even where He did not directly initiate it. God set up how the world works at creation. These are the conclusions we reach. God has set up how the world works at creation, and He actively pursues and initiates redemption. Anything that is of life, anything that is of redemption, He is the one that actively does that. Everything within the world can still be attributed to Him even where it is not directly initiated by Him.


25:00 The two things that we can directly attribute to God is: He has set up how the world works. The second thing we can directly attribute to Him is that He actively pursues and initiates redemption. Despite that, every single thing that happens can still be attributed to Him. He is the one who set up how the world works. Let's say someone jumped down from a very high mountain and killed himself. You can say God killed him. When you say God killed him, you expect that they are talking about direct initiation, that God took direct initiative to kill him. But that clearly is not direct initiative. The guy chose to jump down. But because that's how God set up the world, when someone does this, this is what happens, you can still speak that way and say God killed him. The situation of him jumping down and him dying is what God has set up. This is the first conclusion we are going to reach. If we are reading the Old Testament text seeing God's wisdom and prudence with the lenses of truth. What God actively pursues and initiates is redemption, the things that are of life.


The second conclusion we must reach is man has real free will to take initiative according to how God has set up the world. But even what he does can still be attributed to God. If I'm reading a text and it says, Yahweh said to so and so person, go and do this and that. Under number one, where I was telling us that we must be mindful of three things: the goal of truth, the human and natural means in receiving revelation and writing it despite divine orchestration, and number three, the importance of language, literature, and history. Even when someone receives revelation, I must be aware it's a human being, an imperfect person receiving revelation, writing his revelation, despite the fact that God has chosen this book as the book of truth. I must read it with the lenses of the established truth I can see in His word. He is life, He is light. Some things are clearly established, philosophically so. Some things are not. I must read the narrative carefully in that way.


I've said three things to be mindful of in approaching the text. Two conclusions you are going to reach: God's role in setting up the world as it is, and what He pursues and initiates; man's real free will, which acts in accordance with how God has set up the world, despite the fact that his actions can still be attributed to God. When we are reading the Old Testament text, we must be aware that there are different phases of the historical narrative. The Old Testament is a historical narrative. I will give us the different phases of the historical narrative and I will give us the different explanations to them.


The first part of the historical narrative is the primeval account, or the primodal account. Primeval means the earliest period of humanity. Which is Genesis 1 to Genesis 11. The literature here is highly figurative. When I'm reading this, I must be aware I'm reading a highly figurative account. It is definitely not literal. We are not supposed to hold it with that literalness. Many times when people have ignored this necessity of reading the wisdom of God through those accounts, reading it as the wisdom of God and His prudence, some people have gotten into a state of unbelief in God because of that. You see them become atheistic or agnostic. There was one guy who felt it was just a matter of morality, that he can't accept the Noah's account and all. He has now gone to add other things, strengthening his conviction against faith in God in Christ. But it was the stumbling block of how he was reading the Bible first. He was saying he was a youth pastor, but how he was reading the Bible was the issue. Whoever asked him to read that account like that?


30:00 That portion of scripture is mythological history. Even if those individuals are taken as real individuals, they are real individuals that are basically typological, particularly Adam, definitely not the earliest human, who have been typified as earliest humans. The principle that there are certain earliest humans is still being set there, being projected there. The stumbling block some people experience is because they are reading the text in the way you are not even meant to read any text normally. When you are reading any text, you must appreciate the literature. What kind of literature am I dealing with? If they start telling you the story of Oduduwa, Lamurudu for Yoruba mythological history, you can't expect that you are really believing that Oduduwa and Lamurudu were the first set of people. That's mythological history. It is communicating certain truths, but your attention and focus must be on what the truth itself is. Is the document chosen by God reflecting His wisdom and prudence that speaks about His purpose all the way to redemption? Number one is the primeval account.


Number two is the patriarchal account. What the patriarchal account does, Genesis 12 to 50, is that it narrows down the narrative of the whole Bible to those who are specifically elected for the redemption, the account of redemption that is to be told. Ephesians 1:7 and 8 is saying that we have redemption, which He made to abound towards us in all wisdom and prudence. The focus of the biblical account is to talk about this redemption. The first part was just to give you an overview of humanity, leading to the specific pursuit of redemption, showing that redemption has always been the concern of humanity all through the ages. Genesis 1 to 11, whatever history finds out about when human beings have been, it has been passed down by oral tradition that there is a situation in need of redemption we have always had. We are now narrowing the account to the specific flow of redemption. Genesis 12 is about specific election. This issue of moral truth and its dynamics will still be playing out throughout the account. This place of human and natural means of receiving revelation and writing it despite divine orchestration, will still be playing out in the account. Patriarchal accounts, specific election.


Then we have the Exodus account, which is Exodus to Deuteronomy. When we are reading this, we are reading the major redemptive template in scripture. The flood of Noah is a redemptive template, but the Exodus account is the major redemptive template. If you ever want to explain God's plan of redemption, the Exodus account will be your best bet.


The fourth part of history is the conquest account. The place of the conquest account is missions, or the mandate of Jesus, the mission of the church. When God calls out His people, they are to take the world. In this case, it was a specific land, but when He spoke to Abraham, that land was about all the earth. If we are reading any account to understand the mission of the church, what God wants us to do, we'll be reading the conquest account. We are literally supposed to conquer the world. That's why the conquest account was not absolute victory. Even though you will find that in some of their exaggerated words, they will make it sound like absolute victory, later they will still tell you that those people were still there. Anywhere we go and conquer, some people will still not believe. That's the lesson we learn in the conquest account. These ones are in the realm of real historicity. Even though this patriarchal account, Exodus account, conquest account, despite being in the realm of history that is historical, is very likely exaggerated. If you want to have a proper reading of your Bible, you must be aware. I don't think these things are a problem, but it's better believers are aware. Some people want to shy away from it and claim that means you are not a believer. I am, very much so. Of course there were slaves that escaped, the Shasu of YHWH, that escaped. But the manner of the story that they told of their escape is exaggerated. There are accounts and there are debates. I'm a moderate, I think there's probably a deliverance that happened of those people that were slaves. The nature of all the events that followed it, I can't tell. I just don't know. This is the case where I'm agnostic on it, and I'm just prone to accept a general miraculous hand. I'm well open to accepting exaggerations where they are, without it ever affecting my faith in what the Bible is saying, redemption.


35:00 My general counsel is that if you can, listen to Level 5 Bibliology. If it's on the library, you can look for Bibliology and listen to it, particularly the history and historicity portion. My general counsel for a believer who wants to read the text as God's wisdom, is to be a biblical moderate. You are not there dragging with people the literal fulfillment of every single thing that is there. When you read the account, you will see what is necessary for you to accept. That is reasonable for you to accept. The actual deliverance and redemption. Even if you don't understand the entire means. The actual conquest and dominance on that land.


After the conquest account, we have the kingdom account. What are we meant to read in the kingdom account? We are meant to read how the church functions. This is now how God's people function in their place. Conquest is supposed to be going on at the same time. That's why sometimes in kingdom accounts you are still seeing wars happening. Mission is still going on, and yet we are reading the kingdom, how God's people operate. Conquest will be all the way to Ruth. Kingdom account will be 1st Samuel all the way to 2nd Chronicles. Kingdom account, we are seeing how God's people should operate. What we will be learning in kingdom account is like we are learning about the church.


Let's take it a step further. We see exile accounts. These are times where we see backsliding. Church in need of restoration. Or the world as well in need of restoration. Things have gone wrong again. We need a reestablishment of the kingdom. "Thy kingdom come" is in the hearts of people, which externally dictates the effects seen in our world. That's the exile account.


Then the last thing will be the wisdom books and the prophets. The wisdom books and the prophets will serve as doctrinal or expository materials. Literal teachings and commentaries on the narrative that was happening. This is God's wisdom towards redemption. The account of God's wisdom towards redemption runs through God's plan of redemption across the ages. The mythological history, the elect people, their deliverance or redemption, the conquest or missions, the kingdom or the operation of the church and God's people, their backsliding and need of restoration, and then the wisdom books and prophets, the expository and doctrinal materials. When we are reading all of this, we must read it with the eyes of truth, particularly the truth of morality. It will lead us to certain theological conclusions about the Old Testament books.


40:00 Number one is that if we read the books properly, we will see a very strong sovereignty language. God will be said to do things that He does not directly initiate but that He can be held responsible for because He is the one that set up the world like that. God will be held to do things that He did not directly initiate but that He can be held accountable for. The state has to charge you. The state is the one that will charge you. The state can still provide someone that will defend you. The state will prosecute the person. If the person has no lawyer, the state will still give the person a defense counsel. We'll see all of this when we get there. This is an issue of people writing according to their own revelation. Are they accurate in that understanding is a different issue. Some people say you are overriding the Bible. We have to be careful here, this gets complicated, where everybody just chooses what they want to do. One critical scholar will say people are just giving authority to the Bible, it doesn't have its own authority, it's because they are the ones choosing to do that. It is not necessarily like that. This is an issue of biblical theology with philosophical theology. Not random philosophical theology, strict philosophical theology. And then historical theology, giving us systematic theology. It's a challenge we face. If people will not be strict with their philosophical theology, people indeed will just be picking and choosing and doing anyhow with the text of scripture. You cannot escape the need of philosophical theology, whether it is strict, faithful philosophical theology to biblical theology is a separate issue.


By the time we get to the New Testament text, their understanding of Satan had clearly been separated from someone that is functioning in service of God. In the Old Testament text period, it was still seen like that. Around the second temple period, intertestamental period, that change had started to happen in their understanding. Was it a change in truth? No, this is where people talk about the nature of progressive revelation. That's why I'm saying you need strict, proper, faithful philosophical theology to biblical theology. You will just strictly look at the data as it was, what was on the mind of those people as at then, which you should still point out. You can't understand anything in the Bible because what was on the mind of many people here is different from what was on the mind of many people there. Yet underneath, what was on their mind is still the same. The way they understood the operations of things differed. What remained true was still true. Their way of seeing it at different junctures was not the same.


One account said the Lord moved David to number Israel. Now we are saying Satan moved him to number Israel. We were told the anger of the Lord was aroused against him. If you have understood the truth of God properly, the anger of the Lord is man caused. God already had what He is angry about. When we now see His anger present, it is that you have done something that has demanded for it. Which means in that demand for God's anger, He has withdrawn, and therefore you are under the influence of death, darkness, and evil, Satan. If God says choose life, you reject life. Life is going to go. You are now under the reign of death and darkness, and it's going to affect you. If David walked in pride, he is sort of acting like I don't need God, he's feeling like a big boy, he's now a king. God is withdrawn, and He is angry about that. He's under the influence now of darkness. He's moved by that. You can say God moved him. You can say Satan moved him. Both are correct, because it's how God has made the world. One is direct initiative, Satan, or the role of darkness, Satan. The other one is the overall responsibility of how He has set up the world, God.


You cannot properly understand the Old Testament text with less struggles than the Old Testament text, particularly in the light of the full understanding that we now have in the person of Jesus and with the apostles. It is required of us that we read the wisdom and the prudence of God through those accounts. We have seen God's wisdom towards redemption. I've told you the way you must approach the text. I've told you certain things you will see about God's sovereignty and man's free will. I've told you the different times in history, and I've shown you the five major theological conclusions. For now, this is a good place at level two to understand the Old Testament text. When you have questions, you already have a framework to work with. You can ask, and we will provide answers. By the time we get to level five, you will have a full grasp of these matters.


track 7
Christology


00:00


We are looking at Christology, the study of the Christ. This is level two, so it is just a summary. You get more understanding at level five, but it is a very important subject matter for us to see. We have run down our doctrinal summaries. You remember how we started, that the reason why we need this teaching is that Paul told us there is an exact body of knowledge that God wants us to have, that will equip us to be able to fulfill God's purpose. He called that body of knowledge the unity of the faith, Ephesians 4:13. If you do not have that unity of the faith, you are likely going to be unstable and shaky in your persuasion in the faith of Christ. He wants us to arrive at the unity of the faith, the knowledge of the Son of God. When you arrive at that point, and you are in faith about who you are, you will become strong as a believer to carry out God's will for your life, which is what he called the perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.


Right after you are saved, you have entered into God's purpose. Your biggest goal is to grow so that you will be able to fulfill God's purpose for your life. You have to understand that you are saved, you are in God's purpose, and you need growth to fulfill that purpose that God has for your life. I encourage you to listen to teachings about God's purpose so that you can have an understanding of your place and your part. You need to know your place and part, and what God has created you to do. There is nothing more important than that for the believer.


We are looking at Christology because it is a central part of the knowledge of God's word. Christianity rises and falls on the reality of Christ. It is funny that you find believers whose persuasion about Christ is weak. Some people only have a dogmatic persuasion of Christ. That means just because they were told there is Jesus Christ, they accept it. They do not have a very strong foundation. Some people take it a step further and have a historical persuasion of Christ, which is good, but a historical persuasion still leaves you sort of hanging. You might wonder, "Am I sure He is anything beyond just a man? Granted, I have historical reasons to know that there is such a man, but is that all there is to it?" Our understanding of the Christ needs to be very strong. So we will try to cover the grounds that we need to know about Christ. What are you meant to know about the reality of the person of Christ?


Let us start with Ephesians chapter 1 and trace Christ there. What I want to show in Ephesians 1 is that across the doctrine, Christ is plastered everywhere. There is no discussing the reality of our faith without Christ written all over it. When Paul started talking about his outline of doctrine in Ephesians 1:3 all the way to 14, let us count how many references to Christ we see. Verse 3: "Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ." Just as He chose us in Him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love, having predestined us to adoption as sons by Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure of His will, to the praise of the glory of His grace, by which He has made us accepted in the beloved. In Him we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace, which He made to abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence. Having made known unto us the mystery of His will, according to His good pleasure that He purposed in Himself, that in the dispensation of the fullness of time, He might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and on earth, in Him. In Him we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of Him who works all things after the counsel of His will, that we who first trusted in Christ should be to the praise of His glory. In Him you also trusted, after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, in whom, having believed, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession. That is at least twelve times. That is how emphatic Christ is in the doctrine. The Christian doctrine is about Christ Jesus.


05:00


It centers on Christ. When we talk about the Christocentric nature of the message of the gospel, we cannot miss out on the important detail that all Christ did, He did for God's purpose. Sometimes people have a romantic Christianity. It is all about Jesus, which is true, but sometimes the way people romanticize Christianity makes you wonder if they are serious about the actual mission. The work of redemption is so awesome that we should be in awe. I appreciate it when people have that deep value for the person and work of Christ Jesus. But if you really value redemption, you must copy and paste that value to why redemption was done, which is God's purpose. I value what Christ has done, therefore I must seek to fulfill His purpose. The Lord told us that His servants who do not find out His will but do wrong will be beaten with few stripes. But the one who knows His will and does not prepare and do according to His will, will be beaten with many stripes; they will receive a stricter judgment.


Our love for Christ ought to spur and stir our passion for His purpose and His will. Beholding His person and what He has accomplished should leave you in awe, realizing that He did this just for you to be established in His purpose. This should lead you to commit yourself to Him and His will. The reason why I call it romantic Christianity is that usually, people stop at the awe, as if it is just about us and Jesus. But interestingly, Jesus' attention is to point you to the Father. He wants your interaction with the Father, for you to value yourself as a son, seeing yourself as a joint heir with Him, and interestingly, seeing yourself as a brother with Him. This gives you the strength of relationship with God as Father and enables you to walk in the will of God.


Christ is very emphatic in the doctrine; there is no question. Twelve times within Ephesians 1:3-14, we see that reality of Christ. At this point, we ought to ask a question: What is the Christ all about? We are going to see that the reality of the Christ is born out of necessity. We cannot understand the reality of the Christ without understanding the need of the Christ. There is a need that brings up the reality of Christ Jesus, and that need is sin. The reason why we need the Christ is because of sin.


In Genesis chapter 3, after man has sinned, starting from verse 14 all the way to 19, you must distinguish two things. You will see certain tenses that are talking about consequences—because you have done this, you are cursed. While you see other tenses that are active and direct—I will do this. Genesis 3:14 says, "Because you have done this, you are cursed more than all cattle." Verse 15 says, "I will put enmity..." Verse 15 is God's direct initiative. Verse 14 is not His direct initiative; it is a consequence. God says, "I will put enmity between you and the woman, between your seed and her seed; He shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise His heel."


10:00


Look at the next statement when He was talking to the woman. He says, "I will greatly multiply your sorrow and conception." This is not simply saying that childbirth will be very painful. He is saying there will be multiple births leading up to someone. "In pain you shall bring forth sons; your desire shall be for your husband." The word for husband in Hebrew, just like in Greek, is the same word for man. In English, we have "man" and "husband," but in Hebrew, "Ish" is both man and husband. In Greek, "aner" is both man and husband. So when it says, "your desire shall be for your husband," it is actually saying you will be longing for the man. The man in question is the seed that He promised the woman, which is the Christ. He told the woman, "I will greatly multiply your sorrow and conception," referring to the instances of birth. "You will bring forth sons and your desire will be for the man, and he shall rule over you." This is talking about the rule and the reign of the Christ.


To show you that they were expecting that man or seed, they used the same word "Ish" in Genesis 4:1. Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bore Cain, and said, "I have acquired a man from the Lord." It is the exact word used in the earlier verse. They were expecting the "Ish". In fact, it is argued that she named Abel, "Abel," which means breath or emptiness, because she thought she had already acquired the main person, Cain, the man from the Lord. But when Cain killed Abel, she realized this could not be the one. Then she gave birth to Seth and said, "God has appointed another seed for me instead of Abel, whom Cain killed." She was still looking for the man. There was an expectation that in the multiplicity of births, there would be an arrival at the man, the seed of the woman who is to destroy the evil, the death, and the darkness that had entered the world.


We see that there is a need that gives rise to the Christ. What is that need? Sin, death, darkness, and evil. Now to appreciate the identity of the Christ, we must ask, who is this Christ meant to be? We are saying that the Christ is the only viable solution to the problem of sin. The word "Christ" simply means anointed. In Hebrew it is "Mashiach", and in Greek it is "Christos". High priests were anointed and could be called Christ. Kings were anointed and could be called Christ. Prophets were anointed and could be called Christ. But there was the idea that there is one person who is anointed, chosen, and consecrated specifically for solving this problem. Notice that the work of the high priest, the king, and the prophet were all redemptive works. They were to deliver, protect, and preserve the people. There is someone that will definitively play such a role, delivering us completely and preserving us. This was prefigured in several persons before His arrival.


15:00


What is the only viable reality for the person that will fulfill this role? The problem the person is coming to solve is darkness and death. How do you solve the problem of darkness? You bring light. It means whoever the Christ will be must be light by nature.


Based on the need of the Christ, the only viable person that can be the Christ must be someone who is light by nature. Remember, there is God who is self-existent, and there is creation. God by nature is light. Anything that is first by nature is what God is. Light is first by nature; that is what God is. Life is first by nature; God is life. Righteousness is first; God is righteousness. There is God, who is self-existent, and there is creation, which is what God has made. Creation is a contingent existence, meaning it is not necessary and does not exist by itself; it is dependent on God to be there. Creation has now been affected by sin, death, and darkness. It means nothing in creation can save creation. We are looking for the identity of the Christ, and because creation is now in a state of death, darkness, and evil, we need light. The only option left is the Creator. Only God who is light can enter into that darkness and dispel it. Creation cannot save creation. Sometimes people ask about angels. As far as the Bible is concerned, angels are beneficiaries of that redemption from darkness. Angels are not qualified because they are themselves created beings.


20:00


Angels are not self-existing beings. Even from the Old Testament texts, we can see that. Nehemiah 9, Job 38, and Psalm 148 talk about angels being created. The identity of the Christ requires that the Christ is not part of creation, because all of creation is affected by sin, death, and darkness. This means the only option for whoever will be the Christ is that He must be the Creator. He must be light and life by nature.


The second thing about the identity of the Christ is that He is meant to come and use His nature, life, and light to affect the world that has gone bad. That means the Christ must become part of creation. The Christ cannot be a created being originally, yet the identity of the Christ is not complete without Him becoming part of creation. He must become part of creation at its highest level. There are non-living things, living things, and rational living things, which is man. If His redemption is to be complete, the part of creation He must participate in is man. Man embodies material reality, living reality, and rational, spiritual, metaphysical reality. In coming to solve this darkness problem completely, He must be a man. If He were an animal, maybe He could solve it for living things without touching spiritual life. I am trying to show what is philosophically necessary for the identity of the Christ: He must be God, and He must become part of creation at its highest level, which is man.


If the reality of the Christ is about solving the problem of sin, death, and darkness, the Christ must be God, and the Christ must be man. That is philosophically necessary. He must be the seed of the woman. He must be God, having life, light, goodness, and righteousness by nature. And He must be man so that He legitimately becomes part of creation to legitimately resolve creation's problem. The Christ cannot simply deal with the problem in an illegitimate way.


25:00


Otherwise, our salvation would always be hanging in the balance. He must deal with the problem in a legitimate way. Man has legitimately brought sin and death into the world, and man is meant to suffer the consequences of sin and death. If the Christ will legitimately deal with the problem, He must bear those consequences so that sin and death would have had its problem resolved legitimately and completely. It is necessary that the Christ is God, and also necessary that He is man. This is what sound philosophical theology and biblical theology will lead us to: the Christ must be God and man. When we see templates of the Christ in scripture, we can tell these individuals are not the actual Christ; they are not God that became man. They are examples of the Christ because of their faith in Him. But the Christ is the one who is God Himself and yet becomes part of creation at its highest level, man, to fix the problem of our existence.


In light of the need for the Christ and the necessary identity of the Christ, we begin to see the promise and pattern of Christ. The very first promise of the Christ is in Genesis chapter 3. But we can actually see a pattern of the Christ in Genesis 1. "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth, the earth was without form and void, and darkness was on the face of the deep." The prophetic understanding of "without form and void and darkness" is not an original state. It is a state where things have gone bad. When Genesis 1:2 says the earth was without form and void, it is not the original state of the world when God created it. It is the state of the world after God had made it and something had gone wrong. Genesis 1:1 shows us God made the world, Genesis 1:2 shows something has gone wrong, and Genesis 1:3 shows God saying, "Let there be light." There can never be darkness first; darkness itself is the absence of light. This means there was light in Genesis 1:1. By the time we get to Genesis 1:2 and see only darkness, something has gone wrong, which points to man's sin. Genesis 1:3 is the restoration of light.


That is why we say Genesis 1:1 to Genesis 2:3 is a redemption account. That account is not telling the actual creation of the world in six literal days. It is showing us a redemption account. Everything in Genesis 1 was about the earth being restored. The first day, light was brought back. The second day, space was brought into the flooded earth to divide the waters above from the waters beneath. Notice that the cloud was not created, nor was the sea created. There was a flood, and space was introduced to restore things back to what they should be. God said, "Let the waters be gathered together and let dry land appear." Dry land was already there, but it was flooded. Where we start to see the need to recreate things is with the stars, which were obscured or destroyed by the flood, the plants where life was being restored, the animals being restored, and humanity as well.


30:00


The need for the Christ is sin, death, and darkness. The identity of the Christ is necessarily God and man. The only person that can legitimately resolve the sin problem is God and man. It is only God who can bring His life to dispel darkness, and it is only as a man that He can fully address the effects of sin and death. If He comes as anything other than a man, He can only address sin and death to the degree of that entity. The necessity of redemption requires God and man.


The third thing we see is the promise and pattern of the Christ. The first promise of the Christ is in Genesis 3. God said, "I will put enmity between your seed and her seed. He shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise His heel." It is God who first promised that redemption when sin happened. But the pattern of redemption can be seen from Genesis 1: there will be light in this world of darkness. The pattern of redemption is seen in Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, and the judges. As we keep seeing these different Christ-figures, we realize they are solving the temporal effects of the actual problem. They save the people from slavery, oppression, or an impending flood, but the root issue, they are unable to solve. The judges, the prophets, the kings, and the priests are patterns of the Christ.


These individuals were unable to solve the root problem. We need the person who fulfills that ultimate redemptive work. For example, Psalm 22 says, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" It was David talking about himself and his experiences. The things David was going through were prophetic patterns. Whatever David went through, the Christ would go through the ultimate fulfillment of it. The prophetic pattern speaks of the Christ Himself. This is why we study prophetic patterns in scripture, so that we can align with the right side of the cosmic drama. There are certain patterns in scripture that show us how to walk with God and align with truth.


35:00


We must know what part we are aligning with; we must be very careful in that regard. We see the promise of the Christ and the pattern of the Christ. The heaviest promises of the Christ are found in books like Jeremiah and Ezekiel, where they speak about the Branch that will come from David. Some might argue that we are seeing Zerubbabel there, or that it was fulfilled with deliverers during the intertestamental period, but I believe those prophecies are directly pointing to Christ in finality. We consistently see promises and patterns of the Christ in scripture.


I have established Christ on two premises: first, the philosophical necessity of the Christ. In a world of sin, death, and darkness, it is necessary that the deliverer must be light, and to legitimately deal with the darkness, He must enter creation as God who became man. Second, the prophetic promise and pattern of the Christ. This brings us to the fulfillment of the Christ, which is the history of Christ Jesus.


When we read the four gospels, we see all these events playing out. People were expecting the kingdom of God, and there were angelic appearances. Sometimes we are not deep enough in spiritual and supernatural things to align with what God is doing. Angels were not appearing to everybody; not everybody was living in expectation of the kingdom. Today, we still need to align with the fulfillment of God's plan towards consummation. We must ensure we are aligned in prophetic pattern to what God is doing at this hour. We must ask ourselves if we are the kind of people that the angels will come to. It was not every circle in Jerusalem that experienced this. There was a specific circle: Zechariah and Elizabeth, Joseph and Mary, Simeon and Anna—people who had a heart for the mission and were devoted to prayer. We must be aligned like that, giving ourselves to prayer so that God can speak to us about what He wants to do on the earth through us.


The history of the Christ begins with the anticipation of the Christ, starting with John the Baptist, leading to the birth of the Lord Jesus, all the way through His youth and adulthood. At Level 5, we go through the history of the Christ thoroughly and address questions people raise, such as the claim that Jesus learned magic tricks in Egypt.


40:00


Some people claim He went to India or learned magic in Egypt. Jesus went to Egypt when He was about two years old, and He only stayed there for a period of eight months to one year. What magic tricks could a two- or three-year-old learn? If you calculate the time from when He went to Egypt to when He came back, based on the death of Herod, it was a very short period. There is no evidence of Jesus learning any strange things in Egypt, nor is there evidence of Him going to India. After the brief time in Egypt, He was in Israel throughout His life. His family was likely too poor to travel extensively; they only went to Egypt because the wise men brought gifts that provided the means for them to travel.


I do not have the visual privilege of Thomas or the original twelve disciples, but I am satisfied by the evidence that I have, just as Abraham was satisfied by the evidence of his time. The life of Jesus perfectly satisfies the philosophical necessity and the prophetic promise. That is the basis for faith, which is why the Lord said, "Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed."


45:00


At level 5, we run through the entire narrative of His life and the entire narrative of the work of redemption. We look at all the accounts in their own right and put them together. We piece together every step of redemption all the way to the resurrection. After studying the history and redemptive work of the Christ, the last thing we look at is the kingdom of the Christ. His resurrection brings about His kingdom, and He establishes that kingdom via the church—those who will reign with Him. The mandate of the Christ is the final part of Christology.


Christology is simply the study of the necessity, identity, promise, and pattern of the Christ, His history, His work of redemption, and the kingdom that He founds. Let me wrap up on this note, because the major thing people want to know when it comes to Christology is the identity of Christ. The core truth is that He is God who became man. It is philosophically necessary that the person we are dealing with is God who became man. Some argue that He is "a god", in the sense of an angel. But if you view Him as just an angel, you are not talking about the Christ. That is not the biblical picture of the Christ. He is God who became man. We cannot have genuine faith in redemption if the savior is just a created being. If it takes a created being to save creation, why was that created being not affected by sin? If He was created afresh, why was not an entire new creation made while discarding the first one? It is illogical to have a redemption accomplished by a freshly created being, because that would imply the need for an entirely new creation altogether. Why would there be just one singular exception? It is necessary for redemption that it is God Himself who accomplishes it.


When we talk about the identity of Christ, the question of the Trinity comes up. How should a believer treat the Trinity? We face this issue because when we see Jesus in the Word, we see Him praying to the Father. We see a sense of submission, subordination, and worship in His interaction with the Father. Paul speaks of this in 1 Corinthians 15, saying the Son Himself will be subject to the Father. If the Christ is God who became man, are there three Gods? The theological answer is no, there is one God in three persons. It is not three modes of one God; it is one essence in three persons. This is the Nicene formulation. I believe they did a good job trying to reflect and present the Trinity, but perhaps they did too good a job—more than what can be strictly spelled out biblically. Their formulation can sometimes carry a tritheism effect, making it seem almost like polytheism, even though they clarify that the essence of God is one. What we are often missing is that the Trinity is a matter of revelation. It is not a matter resolvable purely by observation and reason. There is a limit to what reason can do in spelling out this mystery.


50:00


It is a mystery that must be revealed. A mystery is anything that we cannot observe and reason out on our own. Ordinarily, we can observe and reason that there is a God. We can observe the nature of God—that He is self-existent, has intelligence, and has character—because He brought forth a world where there is intelligence and character. But we cannot observe and reason the internal dynamics of God. It is beyond our limits. Observing creation tells us there is a God, but the internal dynamics of His person cannot be deduced by reason alone. We must accept it by faith.


Just as we cannot know God's purpose unless He tells us because it is in His mind, we cannot know the dynamics of His person without revelation. I cannot know your purpose unless you tell me what you are trying to accomplish. I can know the dynamics of your person because I am directly witnessing you, but I cannot directly witness the internal dynamics of God. It is best in our understanding of the Trinity to accept the mystery of it, acknowledging that God is one and three in ways we cannot fully understand. Any attempt to use pure human reason to fully decode it will likely lead to theological trouble. Sometimes, one might be tempted to state what sounds like a logical contradiction—saying God is one person and three persons at the same time—which logically makes no sense because you cannot be one and three in the exact same respect simultaneously. It is best to simply say God is one and three in ways we cannot fully understand. We must remain faithful to the monotheistic truth of scripture as well as the Trinitarian truth of scripture, which is particularly unveiled in Christ Jesus.


That way, we can interact with God in His oneness, and we can interact with God as Trinitarian, without constantly burdening ourselves to resolve the mechanics of it perfectly. We simply accept it in its mysterious nature. I believe that is the most faithful approach we can take to explaining the Trinity according to scripture. Any other attempt forces us to admit concepts that scripture does not teach, such as modalism or tritheism.


That brings us to the close of our study of Christology—the study of Christ, God who became man to save humanity from sin, death, and darkness. We will look at the redemptive work He accomplished in the next session and understand how it affects us.


track 8
Redemption

00:00


Looking at a very important teaching, we are still on level two examining doctrinal summaries. In this particular session, we are looking at redemption. I would like us to turn our Bibles to Ephesians chapter one. I will start by saying that I consider, like you would learn when you get to level five, redemption to be at the heart of Bible doctrine. That is to say, I don't think it's the core issue in Bible doctrine, but it is the bridge because it takes us from the point where there is a problem to the resolution of that problem that brings us back to original intention. Paul, in giving us the summary of the doctrine in Ephesians chapter one, put it at the center as a bridge between what was on God's mind and the fulfillment of that which was on His mind.


That appreciation of redemption is necessary because it shows that if there is a weak understanding of redemption, one's walk in what God intends—His purpose—is going to be affected. Your walk in God's purpose can become shaky. The very essence of the doctrinal summaries we have been looking at, or the essence of the entire spectrum of Bible doctrine, is to train us or perfect us to fulfill God's purpose. We have seen that at the point of salvation, when a man receives the gospel, you come out of darkness and enter into light. At that same moment when you are saved, you are now in God's purpose. You become a son of God, which means there is something for you to fulfill as God's child. As His heir, you have two assignments: the natural assignment He wants you to do and the spiritual assignment.


Being set on that path of purpose, knowing that there's something for you to fulfill, you have this goal that I must fulfill God's purpose. The very first burden on you is to grow, to develop, or to be built to such a degree and extent where you are able to carry out that purpose of God for your life. We saw from God's word that what builds us to that stature that the Lord wants us to have is discipleship. The Lord Himself said that in Matthew 28:18 to 20. He mentioned that He has given the leaders of the church for the discipleship of those who will receive His message. He says, "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and teaching them." Perfecting of the saints is needed for us to fulfill God's purpose. That perfecting is to bring us to that point in growth where we are able to bear the burden of purpose and fulfill it.


Redemption is at the center of that doctrine. Without the proper understanding of redemption, if you don't have that strength of conviction, you will find yourself from time to time easily shaken about different matters that would affect your walk in God's purpose. It can be just by virtue of your humanity and the imperfections that pertain to the same, which means you find yourself in sin. At that juncture, an individual can get so consumed by the fact that they have done a sinful act that they are unable to pick themselves up to walk in God's purpose. There's the very opposite example as well. We can find someone that has a poor reckoning of redemption such that there is no gravity to their life; they are licentious about their conduct. There is no reckoning of their nature in Christ, and as a result, it affects their walk in God's purpose.


05:00 Understanding of redemption is very key. In Paul's outline of the doctrine, he says in Ephesians 1:7, "In Him we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace." What is profound about that is he didn't say, "In Him there is redemption." If he said in Him there is redemption, that would not be wrong, but he's speaking to a particular people—those who have believed the gospel—and he says, "In Him we have redemption." We have studied that part which is God's wisdom towards redemption; this redemption we now have, God worked it out by His wisdom and prudence. Our focus at this juncture is on that redemption itself.


The way we should think about redemption is not just as an event that happened. It's sort of like an asset in our accounts. The implication of redemption is that there's been some value credited to you. The first thing we are going to see is that it tells us we have redemption worked out by God's wisdom, and he called that redemption the forgiveness of sins. What he is doing there is giving us context to redemption. Ordinarily, when we see that word redemption, lutrosis or apolutrosis, it simply is talking about freedom. To be set free, to be made loose, completely free. The implication of that word is there is something we need freedom from. If he says in Him we have freedom, He quickly points out to us that that freedom is the forgiveness from sins, clearly showing that that which we have freedom from is sin. Both the word redemption and the word forgiveness point to the reality of a bondage that we need freedom from.


The word for forgiveness is the word aphesis. It's from two words: apo, which can mean off or away, and hiemi, which means to send or to go. It means to send away. We are talking about forgiveness of sins; it can be sending away sins from you, clearing off sins away from you. On the other hand, it can be taking you away from sins, sending you off or out of sins. In fulfilled reality, both of them are true about us. On the one hand, sins that are to your account have been cleared off. On the other hand, you have been taken away from the bondage of sin. Both things are true when you say I have forgiveness of sins.


There is a context to redemption, and that context is sin. But there is a context itself to sin. When we talk about redemption, we must start all the way at the origin. If redemption is about sin, and sin itself is not independent of a goal that was set that you did not fulfill or that you missed, then it means redemption is about sin, and sin is about God's purpose. The context to redemption is: God made man for His purpose. God gave man free will to accept or reject His purpose. Sin happened, which means man rejected God's purpose. Man by free will rejected God's purpose. Therefore, we now have sin, and it has become necessary that we are redeemed. Otherwise, we are damned. The context for redemption is the truth of our existence: that there is a God who has a purpose, that He has offered it to man, and man by his free will has rejected the same, plunging into a state of sin, death, and contradiction, which God saves us from.


10:00 We have studied Christology earlier, where we saw the necessity of the Christ. By virtue of the nature of the problem that we are seeing in the world, only one entity can resolve that problem. That entity must be light, yet must legitimately come into darkness and legitimately deal with that darkness to bring back light. Understanding that means the only way we can have redemption is it must be by God becoming a man. The creation is under darkness; it has to be creation at its highest because it's the very same way sin happened as well. Otherwise, redemption will only happen to the degree of creation that God became. Or to the degree of light that shines. If light shines only on things that do not have a spiritual reality, then it might be a redemption that pertains only to the material world. The only way redemption can happen is that it must be by God who becomes a man and therefore deals with the contradiction of sin in the world.


The first thing in studying redemption is understanding the context of redemption: God's purpose, man's free will, sin, and the necessity of the Christ. The second thing is the narrative of redemption. The narrative of redemption is found squarely in the four gospels. The redemption we need is substantial. There are times people will say, "I agree that there's a contradiction in the world, but it's because man has just forgotten who he is originally." That's not a serious claim. There's a substantial problem that requires a substantial solution; that's the work of the Christ. We must have the record of that substantial solution, the narrative of redemption.


In the narrative of redemption, the first thing we must see is the narrative of the Christ. The second thing is the Christ's recognition of His work of redemption. This is very key. There are people who will say that He was just taken and killed without any intention to die. They challenge the redemptive narrative fulfilled in Christ on that premise. We must see His recognition of the work He is to do. The third thing we must see is His willingness and agreement to do that work of redemption. The fourth thing we'll see is His execution of this redemptive work. The fifth one is the proclamation of the work.


First, we have the narrative of the Christ, the person of the Lord Jesus becoming a man. Second, He has recognition of the redemptive work He is to do. Let me give you the instances in the book of Matthew where we see Him spelling out that this is what He's here to do. He lived to die. He was aware that this is what His work is for. Look at Matthew 16:21. You remember this is after He asked them who He is and Peter said He's the Christ. We mustn't be quick to think their understanding of the Christ was His own understanding. Their understanding of the Christ was very likely political, someone anointed to deliver, to save, and usually to rule or to lead. At this point where they said He's the Christ, and He told them, "I give to you the keys of the kingdom," they would have been excited that they were following the right person. Look at verse 20: "Then He commanded His disciples that they should tell no one that He was Jesus the Christ." Now look at 21: "From that time Jesus began to show to His disciples that He must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised the third day." There was the recognition of the work He was to do as the Christ.


15:00 Let's see Matthew 17:22. "Now while they were staying in Galilee, Jesus said to them, 'The Son of Man is about to be betrayed into the hands of men, and they will kill Him, and the third day He will be raised up.'" Matthew 20:17-19 says, "Now Jesus, going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples aside on the road and said to them, 'Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and to the scribes; and they will condemn Him to death, and deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock and to scourge and to crucify. And the third day He will rise again.'" We could equally cite Matthew 20:28. This one was more open; it wasn't in private, but it was generic so it's difficult for maybe everybody to have gotten what He said. He said the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life a ransom for many. Lastly for Matthew would be Matthew 26:1-2: "Now it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, that He said to His disciples, 'You know that after two days is the Passover, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.'" He very clearly had a recognition of the work of redemption as something He was to do. You'll find it in other materials as well: Mark 8:31, Mark 9:31-32, Mark 10:30-32, Luke 9:22, 31, 44-45, and Luke 18:31-34.


The third thing is His willingness and agreement to do it. You'll find instances of this in texts like John chapter 10, where He said, "No one takes it from Me, but I lay it down of Myself." It's not something that happened perchance. Beyond that willingness, you have an express account of a conversation to do the work of redemption seen in Matthew 26:37-46, as well as Luke 22:39-46. People will say, "How can you say He's a redeemer, He was chickening out." That only validates His humanity, which is a necessity for redemption. People might bring up others who didn't back down in the face of death, saying Socrates was killed for his beliefs and didn't chicken out. But Socrates is not taking the eternal weight of sin. Christ's physical death in redemption means nothing about the second death. When the Lord said, "My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even unto death," He wasn't just talking about physical death. The death in question that the Lord was about to experience is known in Scripture as the second death, which is not just physical death. There was good reason to feel that way. It only shows His humanity in light of what He is about to face.


It is a message to us to reckon the gravity of damnation. The gravity of eternal condemnation should dawn on us when we appreciate the reaction of the Lord Himself. In Matthew 26:36, Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, and said to His disciples, "Sit here while I go and pray over there." He took with Him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and He began to be sorrowful and deeply distressed. He said to them, "My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here and watch with Me." This is where we start to see the issue of willingness. There is definitely grief at the work He is about to do. Look at verse 39: "He went a little farther and fell on His face, and prayed, saying, 'O My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from Me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as You will.'" It's very clear that the work of redemption, which He is aware He is about to do, was undesirable to Him. It's what He came to do, yet it's not something readily desired. It's something gruesome, despite the fact that He's going to go through it and fully accomplish that work. He says, "not as I will, but as You will."


20:00 In the second prayer, He says, "O My Father, if this cup cannot pass away from Me unless I drink it, Your will be done." We see that despite how undesirable it was, He was willing to go through it. If it cannot pass over Him, He says, "Your will be done." We are told that the third prayer was exactly in that way. He accepted to do it. There was a willingness despite undesirability, and an agreement to do it.


Fourth, there's the execution of the work. This includes the fact that He goes to the cross and dies, and the fact that He is raised from the dead. There is also the behind-the-scenes reality of His death and resurrection, which is a separate issue under the doctrinal overview. The last part we should see in the narrative is His proclamation of that redemption. He proclaims: I am the Christ. I know I am going to do it. I am willing to do it. I have done it. Now, I am proclaiming that what I have done is that redemption. See Luke chapter 24. He proclaims the redemption that He is aware He came to do and that He has accomplished.


Redemption is at the heart of Bible doctrine. Having a bad estimation of redemption affects our walk in God's purpose. We are likely to be shaken in our walk in God's purpose if it is not based on redemption. When we are teaching God's purpose, a person's assignment might be a slave. That person is in God's purpose. Another person might already be in a position of power, might already be wealthy, and is now entering into true knowledge. Sometimes, people think Christianity is meant to upgrade their life, to build a bigger business or start an NGO. A poor person might come into Christianity thinking that they will stop being poor. The truth is Christianity will order your life correctly. There are things you will learn that will repair your life. People might look at someone who was wayward before giving their life to Christ and see how put together they are now, making good decisions and being prudent. Their life is repaired because the knowledge of God orders your steps, guides you, teaches diligence, and teaches respectful interaction. Those things have a positive impact on physical well-being. But that is not God's purpose. All these elements come together, and people often look at this as what they want when interacting with the gospel.


This brings a challenge because a faith that is not properly built is not based on redemption. A properly redemption-centered faith knows why it is saved: "I am delivered from this to do this. There was a reality I was in before. The Son of God came down, suffered, and brought me to another reality. This other reality is His reality." My life cannot be exactly as it was going to be previously. To someone looking outward, it looks like a repaired life where things are moving smoothly, implying the goal is just resolving physical contradictions. But a truly built believer's faith is centered on redemption. It tells them that the life they are now living is a new life entirely. It belongs strictly to God, and they must use it fully to obey. There is a total surrender based on an understanding of redemption. A believer who thinks the word of God just exists to sort out their life is behaving exactly like man before regeneration—seeking principles to get their life running perfectly according to their own will. A truly discipled person, knowing redemption, knows they are fully not their own. The Bible says we must no longer live for ourselves but for Him who died for us and rose again. Why? Because of redemption. That changes a lot. The individual's life completely belongs to God. Let's see Luke 24:44.


25:00 "Then He said to them, 'These are the words which I spoke to you while I was still with you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms concerning Me.'" What are those things? Verse 46: "Then He said to them, 'Thus it is written, and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day.'" It is not that after He died, He realized it was redemption. From birth to His personal recognition, to His agreement to it, to the execution, and after, the narrative of redemption affirms redemption. The problem was the disciples were confused about how exactly He was going to give them this kingdom, and now He's talking about death. The Christ is supposed to rule the kingdoms forever, but they didn't have a full appreciation of the implication of redemption.


Now we are going to the core issue, which is the doctrinal overview of redemption. There are ten things in the doctrinal overview of redemption. This is the bulk of our teaching when you get to level five; it is one of the high points. It is what we often call the "contents of redemption." We said there is the context that leads up to redemption, and the content of redemption—what is inside this redemption He has done. Sometimes people have a wrong appreciation of redemption. The first thing we see is the need for redemption. What is redemption addressing? Simply, sin. At that point, we open up sin. We see sin as man's rejection of God's purpose, and sin as the authority that is now at play because of man's rejection of God's purpose—death and contradiction have come in. We can see sin as the nature man has as a result, and sin as the conduct man does as a result.


No matter the standpoint you are speaking of redemption from, it is still the same redemption. Someone can say, "I am delivered from sin, from the authority of darkness." Another person can say, "My sins are forgiven." The statement "my sins are forgiven" means a deliverance from sin as appropriate to the context. It's not referring to two different things. If you're looking at redemption and sin from the context of conduct, "I am completely forgiven of all sins" means complete freedom from this whole thing called sin. They are speaking about the same salvation. Paul defined the doctrine of Christ with the word salvation in 2 Timothy 3:15. He said, "From childhood you have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation"—which is again saying redemption. This shows how core redemption is to the doctrine. Despite the fact that redemption is just an event that set you into the life God wanted you to have, it is core in defining the faith of Christ and affects how you live the faith of Christ. The value you think it has affects the way you live out your faith.


The need for redemption is for sin in its full understanding. It has dealt with sin across the board—the rejection of God's purpose, the authority, and the state that has come in as a result. We can speak about sin in five ways: man's rejection of God's purpose, the authority of sin, the state of sin (which is death, darkness, and evil that affects humanity and matter), the nature of man, and the conduct of man. Usually, you will see "sins" used to talk about it a lot because it is the most relatable. People are aware that we are not living perfectly; we do wrong that is meant to be judged. It doesn't matter what standpoint, that is what redemption is addressing: this issue of sin in all its ramifications. The second thing we see under the doctrinal overview is the nature of redemption.


30:00 The nature of redemption is very major. There are longstanding debates about whether what Christ did was physical, spiritual, or both. Some would say it is the very physical work He did that redeemed us; that it is the physical blood He shed that saved us. The efficacy of physical blood to redemption becomes an issue, and people debate it. The nature of redemption is that it is both physical and spiritual; in fact, it is spiritual at its core. The physical is necessary for the spiritual, otherwise you are saying He didn't have to become a man for that to happen. So the nature of redemption is physical and spiritual.


Number three we look at is the scope of redemption. The scope of redemption is how long it covers in time. Does redemption avail people before Christ came, and how many people after Christ came does it avail? One of the major texts here is Romans 3:25. He said God passed over the sins that were committed before. Another text is in Hebrews 10, showing that redemption availed people all the way from the first man until Christ's coming, and from Christ's coming to the consummation of redemption at His second coming. On that note, we addressed the scope of redemption, how far it covers in time.


The fourth thing we addressed in the doctrinal overview is the extent of redemption. This asks how many people it covers. Here we have to face some of the Calvinist questions about limited atonement. Is it limited in its extent? How many people did He die for? 1 John 2:2 says He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the whole world. Some argue He died only for those who would believe. Other people hold a view that He died for everybody, even though only some will be beneficiaries of it. The problem is that this view creates theological problems. Are you saying someone is going to burn in hell for sins that have been paid for? These are serious questions. If someone owes a debt and it is paid for fully, why are they being charged for the debt again? If Jesus paid for it completely, yet God demands payment for exactly what Jesus has paid for, the question of God's justice comes into question. To be logically sound without any theological issue, some conclude He did not die for them at all, and that it is just meant for those who will benefit from it. Both of those issues are addressed squarely in level five. But you must know that the extent of redemption deals with who is covered.


35:00 We addressed this completely with robust theological evidence. We must be careful to handle biblical theology side-by-side with historical theology and philosophical theology. The intention of the authors was truth itself. We must be ready to make that defense, putting historical theology under the weight of strict philosophical theology to see what Bible truth is. This document is God's orchestration for us to put together what His truth is, and to understand where their minds were when they were saying certain things.


Number five is the longevity of redemption. Is it eternal? Does it expire? Is it like animal sacrifice that happens yearly? Or does it expire if I do certain things as someone that receives redemption? And if it expires, can I be re-redeemed? This borders on eternal security, or preservation of salvation. Can people be saved multiple times or not? All of these are tied to the longevity of the redemptive work. In concluding that part, we saw clearly that the redemptive work brings salvation that is completely eternal to its beneficiaries. But the beneficiaries are proven by the mark of repentance. I don't believe that someone living unrepentantly is saved and redeemed. One of the core reasons why it's eternal is the same way you are a child of your father permanently, you are permanently a human being by nature. If you are disowned, it doesn't change the fact that you are still a child of your father by nature. But if someone is behaving in a manner that clearly cannot be of the nature of God, which is marked by unrepentance rather than mere imperfection, then we need to raise questions. The least expected of a man having the nature of God in him is repentance.


Number six is the accomplishment of redemption. This asks what Christ was really trying to accomplish. Some people say He took away our guilt. Some say He took the nature of sin for us. Neither of those are correct. He dealt with our guilt, but what Christ did was not as much becoming guilty for us. The idea that we were guilty of something and put it on someone else to suffer for our wrong has become an offense to some people's sense of justice. They say, "If someone kills someone, you are saying someone else goes to suffer for him out of love?" They question the sense of justice in that, saying it's not righteous. But that is not what redemption accomplished.


The proper understanding of what Christ accomplished is that we are slaves under sin, and He went under sin as well as a slave. His "becoming sin for us" is not becoming guilty of sin or having the sin nature, but being found under the bondage of sin to disarm sin. He came under the reign of sin in a body that could die. He eventually died and went to Hades, a place of the reign of sin, to disarm sin. The redemption He accomplished was not becoming guilty of sin or having the sin nature. The Bible uses several descriptions of the actual work He did, which is why we have different theories of redemption or salvation, like penal substitution or Christus Victor.


40:00 Authors and preachers have the liberty to describe the actual work He did in many ways. The question is what was the actual work He did? The actual work is He became a slave under sin to bear the demand that it makes on its slaves, which is the second death. He exhausted that second death and legitimately restored life back. I remember some descriptions of redemption saying that when Jesus got to Hades, He started fighting Satan. I am not saying this to mock anybody; I used to say this as part of my confession. I would describe it like that: Satan can never do anything again, He conquered him, He stripped him of this. Interestingly, Paul uses a description that looks like that, particularly in Colossians 2 and Hebrews 2. But you will be wrong if you think that's the actual thing He did. When you pay attention to the entire scripture, the actual thing He did is He became a slave under sin so the demands of sin could be put on Him, which is the second death. He bore and exhausted that and legitimately brought life back.


If Jesus went there to start fighting Satan, does Satan own sin? If Jesus beats Satan and takes us away, Jesus has stolen us, legally speaking. If God just wanted to steal us, He didn't need any redemptive plan; God's power is higher than everybody's. He would have just sent an angel to steal all of us from the grasp of Satan. But the matter was legal. It had to be a slave that brings the freedom for slaves. He took upon Himself flesh and blood so He could legally fulfill the demands of death, exhausting it completely by virtue of who He is. By virtue of His light, He completely swallowed up the darkness so that darkness no longer holds, bringing about salvation and liberty for Himself and everyone identified with Him. The actual accomplishment of salvation is the legal fulfillment of sin's demands, thereby bringing our freedom. This is the central thesis. Every other description flows out of this truth.


A preacher can want to say this truth so the person can describe it as penal substitution, because you were under death and He went there instead of you. Someone else might say it's Christus Victor, that He defeated sin in battle. Paul sometimes describes it as a victory battle, saying He spoiled principalities and powers. But how did He spoil them? He made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them in the cross. He didn't triumph over them in a physical fight. What happened on the cross was a legitimate execution, exhausting the demands of that legal condition. By so doing, because they can no longer hold Him, He completely overthrows whatever hold they had from its foundation.


Number seven is the effect of redemption. The effect of redemption distinguishes what happens after redemption from what happens fully at the consummation. Redemption's actual immediate effect is spiritual because the secondary effects, which are physical—healing, miracles, certain things that happen—have not reached their consummation. That will be at the end of the age. The immediate effect of redemption is spiritual: the giving of the Spirit, the forgiveness of sins.


Number eight that we saw in the doctrinal overview was the reception and walk in redemption. How do we receive redemption? What do we do to receive redemption? Not just receive, but also walk in redemption. How do I walk in redemption? This is the entire teaching of faith. Simple faith is what is required for receiving it and for the entire duration of our journey in the Christian faith to live its reality. Simple faith makes out of place any other contrary medium. I am not saying God cannot use mediums. God can use several mediums, but they are all anchored in the fact of faith. While they can serve a purpose at an instance, they are not the core of redemption.


45:00 They are not the issue in the reception or walk of redemption. Mediums can be used to serve a purpose as an instance, but they are not the core issue. We must always be careful of institutionalizing any material medium. It will eventually affect the simplicity of faith.


Number nine that we saw under the doctrinal overview of redemption is the hope of redemption, which we have seen is the new heavens and new earth. This includes our glorified body, or rather, our glorified body bringing about alongside it the new heavens and new earth.


The tenth thing we saw is the preservation of redemption. While redemption in itself is eternal (that's the longevity of redemption), there is the preservation of it: the role and work of the Christ in preserving His own, seen in the intercessory work of Christ and His advocacy. These are the issues we covered. When you get to level five, you'll see the evidence brought forth for them, the arguments for and against them, and the explanations of difficult scriptures around them like Hebrews 6 and Hebrews 10.


The last part of our study was the implication of redemption. We looked at the implication of redemption on the material world. The material world is now rightfully owned by Christ. God gave man ownership of the material world, and that ownership had invariably been put under sin, death, and darkness—under the hold of the devil. But now, it is rightfully owned by Christ by redemption. In that same breath, it will be brought into a new state: there will be the new heavens and the new earth.


The spiritual world also belongs to Christ. All authority in the spiritual world now belongs to Christ. Therefore, He says, "All authority in heaven and earth is given to Me." The contrary spirits in the spiritual world still have power, but all authority now belongs to Christ, and that authority is enforced by power; they always have to obey. The issue is that people permit things they should not be permitting.


We can now talk about redemption's implication on angels. The implication of redemption for angels was essentially pre-settled. From the beginning, they had already been offered the reality of redemption, which is why we now have elect angels and the angels who sinned. Some like to take the angels who sinned to be from Genesis 6 based on historical evidence. I think we must be careful. We must handle biblical theology side by side with historical theology and strict philosophical theology. The work of the Bible interpreter is to do biblical theology with historical theology alongside very strict philosophical theology. At redemption, there is not much to be said regarding angels, even though there is an account in Revelation that shows their activity becoming stronger, both for good and for evil, at the instance of what Christ did. This is understandable now that we have reached the last days. The last days begin with Christ's fulfillment of redemption. The angels of light and darkness were settled on the premise of redemption after sin had happened, but from that point, activities get more serious in whatever direction. Revelation 12 is a major highlight in that narrative.


The implication of redemption on man is on three levels: man's spirit, man's body, and the place of man's mind in the equation. Our spirits have been fully affected by redemption permanently; we are new creations. Our bodies will be affected by redemption permanently in the coming age, yet they can be sustained, maintained, and repaired by redemption by faith in this age. Our mind is open to any influence that comes around it. We must allow the truth of redemption to gain dominance there to walk in it. Our mind brings up the issue of walking in redemption.


The last part of the implication of redemption is on God. What does redemption mean for God? It means God has had His purpose fulfilled; He can now relate with us as He desires, as our Father, and we as His children and heirs. It also means He has shown His nature; He is loving and just.


When you get to level five, you will have a deeper, complete study of redemption. For now, if you understand these things, you should be standing on solid ground. That solid ground means sin and death have completely and permanently lost their hold on you. It means because of your new nature you will always walk in the life of God, including repentance, and because of that you can now confidently and boldly fulfill God's purpose. One clear implication of redemption on us should be boldness. It is repeated in Hebrews 4:16, Hebrews 10:19, Ephesians 3:12-13, and Ephesians 2:18. Boldness should be a clear emotion we have from redemption—that boldness that I am safe in His hands. I am preserved by redemption, I have eternal life, and in that light, we can now boldly walk in our new nature.


On that note, we bring this teaching to a close. You will find an awesome teaching on redemption in level five.


track 9
Church and Its Mission

00:00


We are looking at the Church and its mission. Before I go to any text, we will be looking at Ephesians 3 before we look at Ephesians 1. We speak about God's purpose as we have been studying as sonship, but we can have a very individualistic sense to it that betrays the intention that was on the heart of God. If we say God's purpose is sonship, you could as well say God's purpose is one person being His child and being His heir. But if we look at what was on His heart, it was more than one person. When He said we have the spirit of sonship, the Spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are children. It is very clear that His intention is this plural reality—a collective, a people that have this reality of sonship.


One of the texts that makes this very clear, that God's purpose is not just one person being His son but a people that have that reality, is Ephesians 3:10 and 11. It says, "To the intent that now the manifold wisdom of God might be made known by the church." That "now" is talking about when Jesus has fulfilled redemption. After redemption, God is able to fully show His wisdom. The manifold wisdom of God might be made known by the church to the principalities and powers in heavenly places.


There are two ways to think about that. You could say God is making known His wisdom by the church saying it, or God is making known His wisdom by how the church is. The second one is the intention of Paul here. He is not saying God's wisdom is made known by the church telling people, "This is God's wisdom." Of course, we could also make known God's wisdom by our preaching, but the reality of who we are reveals what God always wanted. The wisdom of God is made known by the church to the principalities and powers in heavenly places. We are making known what God always wanted to the principalities and powers in heavenly places.


You can think about it as the angels are seeing what God always wanted. But you could also think about it as the world is seeing what God wants. Both the spiritual entities as well as the natural ones, humans, are witnessing God's purposes when they see the church. I like a statement made by Peter in 1 Peter 1:12. He says that we have received in the gospel the things that angels desire to look into. They wanted to see the fulfillment of what this creation and existence is all about, and now they have eventually found that in what Christ has done, which the church is the product of.


I will read verse 10 again, then read to verse 11 to make that simple point: the church is really what God's purpose is. When we say sonship, it is not sonship of an individual; it is sonship of a people that is the church. "To the intent that now the manifold wisdom of God might be made known by the church to the principalities and powers in heavenly places, according to the eternal purpose which He accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord." What they are seeing of God's wisdom is in the light of His eternal purpose. What is seen in the church is the fulfillment of God's purpose. The church reflects the fulfillment of God's purpose.


05:00


To make this clear, let us look at Romans 9:3. Paul says, "For I could wish that I myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my countrymen according to the flesh, who are Israelites." He so desires their salvation that even if it is at the cost of his own damnation, he doesn't mind. The Lord gave up Himself for our salvation; Paul is saying, "I wish I could be sacrificed for the sake of their salvation." Verse 4 says, "Who are Israelites, to whom pertain the adoption." That is the same word huiothesia, which is sonship. Ephesians 1:5 calls it God's purpose.


He didn't say to one person pertains sonship. He rather says to this people, his countrymen, his brethren after the flesh, pertains sonship. God's clearest depiction of His purpose in the Old Testament was with a people, Israel. And what they were to reflect is sonship. Sonship is not a reality that is about one person saying, "I am a son of God, I am in His purpose." It is really about the community. What God wanted is a community of people that are His children, amongst whom He dwells, and that are also His heirs.


As we start looking at the subject matter of the church, the church is the awesome fulfillment of God's purpose. We could talk about God's purpose from an individual standpoint, but speaking about it awesomely, the church is what God's purpose is. What we see as the people of faith is what God's purpose is. Those people reflect God's purpose. God's intention is for every single person to be in His purpose. 1 Timothy 2:3 says this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who desires all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of truth. He wants every human to be in His family.


There is no human that exists that God did not intend to be in His family. Now they have their choice to receive or reject His will, but every single one of us is made to be in God's family. The entirety of humanity is what ought to embody God's purpose. That the church is today called the fulfillment of God's purpose is because those are the people that have received His will for their lives. They have received the Spirit by receiving redemption.


One could have said humanity is what God wants, and you would almost be correct. He wasn't wanting one man in His life; He wanted a people in His life, a people in His light, a people of His Spirit. That is God's purpose. The fundamental understanding you ought to have about the church is that the church is the reality of God's purpose. When we get to the new creation, we also say this is the fulfillment of God's purpose, speaking more to the individual sense of it. But the church is really the complete, awesome embodiment of God's purpose.


It is a serious matter when we are discussing the church. You can't go it on your own when you are walking in God's will. If God's will is the church, it is not something that can be lived out just personally. It is something that involves this community that He ever wanted. I mentioned in Romans 9 that to Israel pertains sonship, which we have well established as God's purpose. You will find that Israel was also described as a church. To Israel pertains sonship, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the service of God. This Israel is also described as a church.


10:00


Let's look at Acts 7:37 for a direct description of Israel as the church. Here, we see Stephen preaching. "This is that Moses who said to the children of Israel, 'The Lord your God will raise up for you a Prophet like me from your brethren. Him you shall hear.' This is he who was in the congregation in the wilderness." Some translations say "the church in the wilderness." Moses was amongst the people of God in the wilderness, and he calls them the church. That word "church" used there is the exact same word used for the church everywhere else. The book of Acts uses "church" for the church from the resurrection. Translators will prefer to change it to "congregation" in this context, but it is the same word, ecclesia.


He was with the ecclesia in the wilderness. Today we are called God's ecclesia by the work that Christ Jesus has done. The church that is fulfilled in Christ was foreshadowed in the Old Testament text. The people that made up the church in the Old Testament is what the writer of Hebrews, in Hebrews 12:22-24, calls the spirits of just men made perfect. They were righteous by faith, they were just by faith, but now they have been made perfect by the indwelling of the Spirit upon the fulfillment of redemption in Christ.


Hebrews 12:22 says, "But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn." What he calls the general assembly there is the church. It is the gathering of all people from different places, the entire congregation. It is describing where we are: God's city, God's house, God's temple. It is the congregation of angels, the assembly of saints, the church of Jesus. What else is it? "To God the Judge of all, to the spirits of just men made perfect."


If you read the earlier portions of the book, you understand what is calling the spirits of just men made perfect. He had talked about the elders who were justified by faith in Hebrews 11. Hebrews 11:38 says, "Now the just shall live by faith." Then it says faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. It was talking about the faith of people before redemption. They lived by faith, they were made just by faith, and it was a faith in the light of what would be fulfilled. By it, the elders obtained a good report.


Despite the report they obtained because of the faith they had that redemption would be fulfilled, verse 40 tells us, "God having provided something better for us, that they should not be made perfect apart from us." And all these, having obtained a good testimony or report through faith, did not receive the promise. They were made just, they were made righteous by faith, but they didn't receive the promise. The actual thing God always wanted us to have—His Spirit—they didn't receive it because redemption had not been fulfilled. So despite the depiction in them, they didn't have the substance of it. They didn't receive the promise, God having provided something better for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.


15:00


In that era, they were just, righteous by faith, but they were depicting the reality of what God wants: the church. So we can say the church was foreshadowed by them. Today, we can really say they are part of the church. We are now one body; they are part and parcel of the church, one congregation.


Not only was the church foreshadowed in the Old Testament era, you will see that it was still described by Jesus even during His own time, before He had fulfilled it in redemption. He was going to bring about His own church by the work of redemption, fulfilling God's purpose, but He was still describing a present church during His lifetime in the four gospels.


See Matthew 18:15. The Lord was speaking here about a situation where there is an offense between two brothers. If there is such a situation, you should go and tell the person alone. "Moreover if your brother sins against you, go and tell him his fault between you and him alone. If he hears you, you have gained your brother. But if he will not hear, take with you one or two more, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established." The first step is to discuss it personally. Second step, take other people to have a discussion. The third step, verse 17: "If he refuses to hear them, tell it to the church."


His own church had not yet been birthed. He had not yet brought about the reality of the church God wants—a people indwelt by the Spirit. Yet there was what they knew to be the church then, just like Stephen was saying there was a church in the wilderness. They understood the church as a congregation of people called out in the light of something. This is where we need to explain what the word "church" means: ecclesia.


There are two words there: ek, which means "out of," and the other word is rooted in the verb kaleo, "to call." It means "called out of." A people called out of. There are many ways it can be used. It was used by the Greeks for their general assembly. Like when we have the House of Reps today—you have called some people out of the general populace to represent others. Sometimes people try to describe the church as being like that today. I don't think the Bible really presents it that way, that the church is a people that are a governing authority representing the rest of society.


The way the Bible uses ecclesia is quite different. It is a people called out of a particular contradiction or bondage. When it was talking about the congregation in the wilderness, these were the people called out of Egypt. A separated people, a holy people. There is a state of sin and death in the world; these ones are separated, called out from that common problem or bondage of humanity. That is the sense in which we speak of the church of Jesus.


By the time He says "tell it to the church here," it is still talking about Israel regarded as God's called-out people. Tell it to the church. At this time, the church was in a synagogue form; there were different pockets of gatherings. That is why later down in Matthew 18, He will talk about His own gathering where people will gather in His name. But they understood that there was already a church based on what happened to them, their redemptive work from Egypt. The Exodus.


He is saying this reality that is applicable now will be applicable when there are gatherings in my name. You will have that same authority. "Whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven." That text actually means what you will be binding on earth is what is already bound in heaven. What is bound in heaven? God has bound or forbidden darkness, death, evil. By the authority you have, you will be opposing the same things. You are not meant to have fellowship with such things. You are supposed to set aside the leaven to not leaven the whole lump. That is exercising the authority of the church.


20:00


People sometimes say what you bind on earth will become bound in heaven. That is not the idea. It is the other way around. What you bind is what is bound in heaven, and it is actually pointing to a future reality because it is the work of redemption that will lose life and bind death. It will defeat death in heaven and bring about the reign of life. Long and short, the church is the complete reality of God's purpose. It was foreshadowed in the Old Testament. It was still mentioned by the Lord. It had a futuristic depiction, an incomplete reality in the time of the Lord Jesus.


The third thing we see is that there is the church that Jesus builds. The Lord Jesus fulfills or brings to pass what God always wanted. The people of faith become part of God's one big body because of the redemption that Christ has done. In Matthew 16, there was a conversation that ensued by a question Jesus asked them. "Who do men say that I am?" Eventually, Peter gave the right answer: "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God." Whatever their conception of the Christ is is a different issue. They might think the Christ is supposed to be a national ruler that is going to have international clout like David, or a spiritual ruler whose spiritual rule is affected on the natural. But notwithstanding, they still believed Him to be the Christ, the Son of the living God.


What did Jesus say when Peter said that? "Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father in heaven. And I say to you, you are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it." You are Peter (Petros). Upon this rock (Petra)—even though we understand that Petros is masculine, the word is ordinarily feminine, so the distinction between Petros and Petra may not mean much here. It is worth pointing out that there can be such a distinction, where Petros was regarded as a little rock compared to Petra as a big one, but it is argued that such a distinction did not exist at this time. Also, Jesus must have been speaking in Aramaic or Hebrew, so the distinction would not have been an issue in His speech.


He says, "You are Peter, upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it." This text has caused a lot of debate. Did Jesus build the church on Peter? The problem with that understanding is what is the very act of Jesus building His church? Whenever you read anything or see anything, you need to answer the questions of truth about that thing: What is this? When was it? Where did it happen? Who did it? How did the person do it?


The subject matter here is "I will build my church." There is a question of when. There is a question of where. How will He build His church? Who is going to build the church? He said, "I will build my church." We can put the "on this rock" to the side while we deal with the other questions of truth. When did He build the church and where? The gates of Hades will not prevail against it. That means His building of the church has something to do with a particular place, Hades, and Hades' authority. Hades is the realm of the dead. The authority of Hades is death. So the gates of Hades will not prevail against it.


25:00


Acts 2 in Peter's own teaching tells us that Jesus, in the work of redemption after His death on the cross, His spirit went to Hades. His soul went to Hades. This idea of Hades not prevailing against Him is not future to redemption; it is actually what happened in redemption. Death and Hades did not prevail against Him in redemption. Peter had no business with what was going on there. So the rock upon which the church is built, that Hades fails to prevail against, Peter was not yet in view there. The reason Jesus was talking about Peter in this text is a very important reason.


Look at Acts 2:24. It says that God raised Jesus from the dead, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible for Him to be held by it. He could not be held down by death. Death and Hades are one reality. Hades is simply part of the authority of death. That is why in Revelation 1:18, the Lord said, "I have the keys of Death and Hades." The defeat of death is itself the defeat of Hades. When it says the gates of Hades will not prevail against it, Jesus is saying it was not possible for death to hold Him when He went to Hades, the place of the authority of death. He bore fully the demands and consequences of the same and rose again from the dead.


Jesus building His church and Hades not prevailing against it is a specific event that happened in redemption. Debating over the fine details of the words while ignoring the substantial issue being discussed—what is being said, the questions of who, why, how—is not the way to read. The act of building the church was accomplished by Christ in His death and resurrection. The rock upon which the church was built, that Hades failed to prevail against, is Christ Himself. The ongoing sense of Hades never prevailing against the church is because of the fulfilled sense in what Christ did. The Rock is Christ.


He is bringing Peter into the discussion because Peter is the one who recognized Him as the Christ. "You are Peter, and upon this rock [the reality of Christ], I will build my church." So the church is built on Him. We are built as living stones on Christ, the chief cornerstone. Ephesians 2:19-22 says we are built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone. The church is a product of redemption. Redemption has given the legitimate right for all humans to become part of God's family. That is the church, the people of God. Redemption has made it possible for people to come out of death and darkness into life and light. The work He did has made it possible for people to come out of death and darkness into life. Hades cannot hold people back based on the work He did.


Ephesians 1:15-18 says, "Therefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints, do not cease to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers: that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him, the eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that you may know what is the hope of His calling, what are the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints."


30:00


What are the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints? The inheritance God has given to us is His Spirit. But that inheritance of the Spirit includes the reality of an inheritance involving creation, the severe inheritance. There are texts where you read inheritance and it is about all of creation, like when it says the meek will inherit the earth. There are texts where the inheritance is the Spirit. You must be aware of that in God's Word.


"That you may know what is the hope of His calling, what are the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of His power toward us who believe, according to the working of His mighty power which He worked in Christ when He raised Him from the dead and seated Him at His right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality and power and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this age but also in that which is to come. And He put all things under His feet, and gave Him to be head over all things to the church, which is His body, the fullness of Him who fills all in all."


The power at work towards those who believe is the same power that was worked in Christ when He raised Him from the dead. What was worked in Christ brought Him out of the dead, placed Him far above all authorities, put all things under Him. By virtue of the fact that it was done for others, it accrues to them. He gave Him to be head over all things to the church, which is His body, the fullness of Him.


The idea of calling the church the body is that the realities of the head are the realities of the body. Calling the church the body is first an identification term. We share the same things. We are one. The head and body make one person. It is in this sense that He told Simon, "You are Peter, you are part of me." You are part of this building, this rock. You are part of me.


The church is Christ's body, meaning the church is one person with Christ. Marriage is used to describe that reality, where two are now one. One person is head, but they are now one person. There is leadership in that, and the same thing applies with Christ and the church. We are fused to one person, and there is yet leadership in that—He is our Lord.


1 Peter 2:4-5 says, "Coming to Him as to a living stone, rejected indeed by men, but chosen by God and precious, you also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house." Jesus is a living stone; you are living stones. We are identified with Him, fused as one with Him. Therefore, the church is called the body of Christ.


35:00


The second critical reality about the church as body, coming from that idea of identification, is that we all share the same reality. We are one, one body, one person. The church as a body means a community of people that share the same reality. We share the same reality across differences. That is precisely what the church means: a body across gender, race, and class. A people sharing the same reality across gender, race, and class.


What God has accomplished in the new humanity is that the old humanity struggles to exemplify equality of gender, equality of races, and equality of class. You will see them struggle to exemplify this. It is only in Christ that equality is found. God sought to fix this via the redemptive work of the Lord Jesus in the church. It would be most unfortunate if the church now continues to take on the same identity as the old humanity. We are meant to show people, "This is how things should be." We should reflect that equality of people across gender, race, and class.


Galatians 3:26 says, "For you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus."


All of us share this reality of sonship by faith in Christ. Being baptized into one body eliminates inequality along the lines of gender, race, or class. You are put on Christ. You are all just Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek (race), slave nor free (class), male nor female (gender), for you are all one in Christ Jesus. The understanding of the church as a body is that we are one with Christ and we are a community of people that share the same reality across gender, race, and class. The church is one person with Christ.


Now, we proceed. In our study of the church, we reach an important aspect: the local church. When Jesus said, "I will build my church," the next contact we have with the word "church" in the Bible, after Matthew 16 and 18, is Acts 2. In Acts 2:47, it says, "The Lord added to the church daily those who were being saved." This is not just about the spiritual reality; it was about a physical gathering of people. There is a sense in which we study the church as a spiritual reality—we have come to Mount Zion. But particularly in the book of Acts, the consistent use of the word "church" refers to a physical gathering.


40:00


In Acts 5:11, "Great fear came upon all the church." It's talking about the gathering of the people that are part of that spiritual body. This gathering of those people is called the church. We can choose to describe this as the local church. It depends on the terms used. In a denomination, you might say "the Fullness of Christ Church" is the general church, and the different locations are local churches. But in this context, "church" as that spiritual reality now has the intended physical gathering, which we refer to as the local church.


Is this physical gathering a matter of choice? "Well, we are the church spiritually, we can choose if we want to gather or not." Is the physical gathering a necessity or an option? Brothers and sisters, there is a necessity for physical gatherings. Every time the Lord spoke about the church, He said, "I give you the keys of the kingdom." In Matthew 18, He talked about binding and loosing. The authority the church has is meant to be exercised in its gathering.


All authority has been given to Christ in heaven and on earth, and He says, "Go therefore and make disciples." Despite being part of this spiritual body, the essence of being part of it is for you to make disciples. There is an instruction Jesus gave that births the local church. The whole issue of discipleship is rooted in God's purpose. The reason there is a necessity for the local church is God's purpose. The spiritual family that we are requires the actual interaction of a family. You cannot be a family without interaction. If the church reflects God's purpose—a family—there must be commensurate physical interaction that reflects it.


One of the words used to describe the coming together of the church is the same word used to describe a husband and wife coming together. 1 Corinthians 5 talks about when you gather together. There is a necessary physical interaction the church must have to actually function as a people of God's purpose. Family requires physical interaction.


Why do we need this physical interaction? The major reason the Lord gave is discipleship. That is the reason we saw in Acts 2:42. They continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine, in fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and in prayers. The physical interaction is for the sake of discipleship. Discipleship is like raising a child. Ephesians 6 says to nurture children, raise them up in the way of the Lord. You can't nurture a child in a non-physical way. We must banish the idea that there can be a purely non-physical gathering system for the church. There can be the application of virtual tools available to us today, but it can never take the place of the necessity of physical gatherings for the full expression of God's intention. We must interact as a family.


45:00


There will be meetings. There will be training to perfect the saints. There will be ministry—how it carries out its work. There will be leadership. There will be finances; the order outlines how finances are handled. There will be a natural order. 1 Corinthians 14 says let all things be done decently and in order. In 1 Corinthians 16:1, Paul says, "Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given orders to the churches of Galatia, so you must do also." He gave an order to the churches in Corinth, just like he gave to the churches in Galatia. Every church must have order—how it operates, how it is arranged.


We shouldn't have church splintering for no reason. People just say it's based on a "call." That call should be within the operation of the local church, which leads us to the operation of the local church. How does it operate? There will be doctrine that it should be founded on. There will be meetings. There will be training. There will be ministry. There will be leadership.


The next thing we are going to study is the mission of the church. We have to have a proper understanding of what Jesus sent us to do: evangelism and discipleship. There is a wrong understanding of evangelism sometimes. Evangelism is the full publishing or publicity of the Word. There is a value for one-on-one discipleship that we cannot ignore, which is the ability to effectively disciple people. We should factor that into our ministry for the sake of discipleship, but we must not ignore what evangelism actually is: the full publishing of the Word.


Your individual place in the body of Christ is very important. Starting with salvation. Once you are saved, Ephesians 4:7 says to each of us grace is given according to the measure of Christ's gift. You have an individual part and place in the body of Christ. There is a spiritual assignment God gives to everyone. Some people never do it. Some people may never know it. Every single day you waste not taking maximum steps in your spiritual assignment is a day of disobedience to God's purpose for your life.


It unfolds from salvation to discipleship, all the way to leadership. You start doing the work of ministry, then you enter into leadership, assisting in leadership and eventually functioning as an overseer. God wants us to take our place and unfold in our place in the body of Christ. That is the Church and its mission.


track 10
00:00 - Introduction to Eschatology and the Believer's Perspective


We are looking at eschatology. It is still level two, and now we are on the ninth teaching out of the ten-part outline of doctrine that Paul told us about. This one is eschatology. You can say the study of the last things, the study of the last days, or the study of the latter times. There are many descriptions you can use for this teaching. We must not teach eschatology as the only thing to understand about Christianity. You will find Christians whose only understanding of Christianity is eschatology. It is unfortunate that there are believers who think the Christian life is only about eschatology, thinking that after salvation, they have to make heaven, so they are living in dangerous times trying their best to ensure they make heaven. There are also those who have no care about the Bible truth on eschatology.


A believer that is not eschatological is likely going to be worldly, because eschatology is a necessary part of our perspective to living in this age. Some people live as if everything is gloom and doom, and yet the world doesn't end. If the same people who wrote to us about eschatological truths, the apostles, were instructing about present living in a very serious way, it means you are having an imbalanced perspective about the Christian faith if all you think of is eschatology. You must have the perspective that the Lord Jesus and the apostles had concerning the last days. Some are dismissive of it, usually without explanation. We just want to situate properly the Christian perspective on eschatology.


In this level two, we are doing doctrinal summaries. Summaries should be an anchor of what to believe on that subject matter. It is never going to take the place of level five eschatology, which delves into details that are impossible to do in one session. You can't teach the book of Revelation in one session, let alone the eschatological details from the book of Daniel. Eschatology begins from Genesis 1. Understanding the millennium requires understanding Genesis 1, Psalm 90, and the rest of scripture to make sense of why John in Revelation spoke about the millennium. You cannot afford ignorance or not to listen to the whole teaching if you want a full understanding, but this session will only attempt to give you the Christian anchor on eschatology. Another challenge with this session is I will not give you as much evidence for the conclusions. It is like when Paul was writing Ephesians 1; he said a lot of things in conclusion without giving detailed explanation and evidence because it is a summary. Life is in phases; men are in sizes. This is level two, so we have to cut our coat according to our size.


05:00 - Discipleship, Growth, and the Seal of the Spirit


We have been studying what should follow after we are saved and have received God's purpose. My next goal is to fulfill God's purpose, but I realize that to fulfill it, I need to grow to that place in stature where I am able to fulfill that purpose. I have two goals: to fulfill God's purpose, and to grow so that I can fulfill that purpose. That growth, the Lord Jesus told us, happens by discipleship. He that is perfectly trained will be as the master. Paul repeats the same thing in Ephesians 4; he says what you need is the perfecting of the saints. The perfecting of the saints happens by two things. First, it will bring you to the unity of the faith, the knowledge of the Son of God. We must be careful not to misunderstand what unity of the faith means. It means the wholesome message of what we have believed. Second, you need to arrive at the perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. That is the actual growth that the knowledge should bring when you respond by faith stand. It is a continuous stand that makes for that reality.


There is a goal of knowledge and a goal of growth because of faith in the knowledge we receive. What is the knowledge that is going to give us the level of growth God wants us to have? Paul told us in Ephesians 3 that he had written in a summary manner the knowledge that will give us that growth. Ephesians 3:1 says, "For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you Gentiles—if indeed you have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which was given to me for you, how that by revelation He made known to me the mystery (as I have briefly written already)." There is a summary way to state the entire doctrine. We can start out by first giving you the summary as an anchor for you to proceed to further studies of the entire message.


The summary can be found in Ephesians 1 from verses 3 to 14. The first part was talking about God's purpose, from verses 3 to 6, how we are blessed because He chose us before the foundation of the world. The second part started talking about redemption, which He worked out by His wisdom, bringing us to the church, gathering together all things in Christ, and giving us an inheritance. The last segment of what is said in this summary of the doctrine includes two things, found in verses 13 and 14. It says, "In Him you also trusted, after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in whom also, having believed, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise."


Those of us who have believed in what Christ has done have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. The way he describes the reality of the new creation is in an eschatological sense by using the word "sealed." A seal is with the idea of something being preserved for a later goal, a later use, or a later outcome. Imagine Coca-Cola is producing Coke. They bring the bottles, pour the content, and then they seal it. Someone is going to open it and drink it; that is the later outcome. It is sealed for that end. We are told you are sealed. A seal always has the idea of preservation with an intended outcome. It can be preservation for a particular purpose just so that you are safe from every other thing, but usually, it is with an intended outcome. A seal means there is something that is to be accomplished. Verse 14 makes sense of this: "who is the guarantee of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession."


10:00 - The Guarantee (Arrabon) and the Timeline of Redemption


The Holy Spirit is the guarantee. That word is arrabon. Scholars explain arrabon as an engagement ring, but an engagement ring does not fully capture the idea. The idea of a guarantee or arrabon is any form of collateral that is weighty enough to cover for what will subsequently happen. If someone is seeking a loan and they ask for collateral, the person likely wants to use a piece of land because it is worth more than what they need, but they need liquid capital. The collateral is worth more. The word arrabon develops directly from the Hebrew equivalent. The first time we see the Hebrew equivalent was in Genesis 38, in the incident of Judah and Tamar. Judah asked for a collateral or guarantee, giving something worth way more than what he needed to pay her, with the absolute assurance that he would get back what he needed eventually.


The seal of the Holy Ghost is a guarantee of that which we are to receive. It is not that the Holy Ghost is so valuable to God that He will come and get it back, but rather that the Holy Ghost is more valuable than what we are going to get at the end. The Holy Ghost is the one that will do what we will get at the end. He has given us that which will do what we will get at the end. The Holy Ghost we have received is more than capable of everything that is to happen.


We have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the guarantee of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession to the praise of His glory. Notice the word "until." There is a timeline between having the Spirit and the redemption of the purchased possession—of what God now owns. The inheritance we have found from our other studies is the entirety of creation. There is the inheritance of our bodies, found in 1 Corinthians 6:20: "Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's." Creation has been taken under corruption and now belongs to the reign of sin, death, and darkness. But God purchases it back by what Christ has done, though He has not yet redeemed what He has purchased. He has not yet taken full grasp and ownership of what He has purchased. From the point that you have the Spirit that is able to execute that work of redeeming creation—including your mortal body—until the point where that work is done, there is a distance. He has given you the guarantee until the redemption.


15:00 - Defining the Last Days


That distance between when you have the Spirit until the redemption is what the scriptures will describe as the last days. The period from when the purchasing has been done and the deliverance has been done, until the full consummation of that redemption—the redemption of the purchased possession—is the last day. Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. That is talking about the redemption of the material world, the creation, and our mortal bodies being redeemed.


There is a distance between this point where Christ has accomplished redemption and when there is going to be that consummation. That distance is not something that Jesus or the apostles created out of convenience. It is a pattern that has always been in scripture. That the apostles and the disciples of the early church had that mindset, which we ought to have as well, is not strange. The manner in which some people have that mindset today is a challenge. People point to current events like Artificial Intelligence and say the world is ending. That is not the eschatological mindset of the Bible. During the early days of the internet, crossing from 1999 to 2000, people predicted the end. Different denominations set different dates. That is not how Bible eschatology works. People see an eclipse and call it a cosmic sign, saying the sun will become dark and the moon like blood. The mindset that the Lord can come at any time is very important and scriptural, but the manner in which people hold that mindset is often wrong.


There is a time between the redemption Christ has done and the consummation of His redemption. The very first text we should look at to understand this timeline is Acts 2. In Peter's preaching, he reckons his preaching as an inauguration of the last days. This period we are in is pointing us to the last days. In Acts 2, Peter was preaching on the day of Pentecost. The people gathered and said the disciples were drunk. Peter said these men are not drunk as you suppose. This is what was spoken by the prophet Joel: "It shall come to pass in the last days, says God, that I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh." Peter is saying something just happened, and it is a reflection that we are in the last days. What is going on is within the timeline of the last days. The start of the last days is a debate. Should we say it started on this day, or is this day part of what features within the last days? It means the last days were already at play when Peter was speaking. What has been fulfilled is what Prophet Joel said would happen in the last days. The last days are not some far-off time; they include what was witnessed in Acts 2.


20:00 - Biblical Evidence of Living in the Last Days


Paul in Ephesians 1 talks about a timeline that flows from when Jesus accomplishes redemption to the redemption of the purchased possession. Peter describes that timeline as the last days. You will start to realize that this concept of using "last days" to describe that timeline is very common in scripture. Hebrews 1:2 says, "Has in these last days spoken to us by His Son." The writer of Hebrews is saying the last days have something to do with the arrival of the Son. The arrival of the Christ is at the center of what they were all expecting.


James 5:3 says, "Your gold and silver are corroded, and their corrosion will be a witness against you and will eat your flesh like fire. You have heaped up treasure in the last days." James was talking to rich believers who treated their wealth as their salvation. This condemnation of those who treat their wealth as their salvation is very common in scripture. Wealth as what people trust as the essence of life is condemned. James uses the phrase "in the last days."


1 Peter 1:5 and 20 say, "Who are kept by the power of God through faith for salvation ready to be revealed in the last time." He was ordained before the foundation of the world but was manifest in these last times for you. There is a phase called the last times. The concept of the last time starts with the presence, the birth, or the conception of the Christ.


2 Peter 3:3 says, "Knowing this first: that scoffers will come in the last days, walking according to their own lusts, and saying, 'Where is the promise of His coming?'" Scoffers have been coming since the days of Noah, which means eschatological patterns have been happening since then. We have minor eschatological timelines across every generation. Jude 18 tells how they were told there would be mockers in the last time who walk according to their ungodly lusts.


1 John 2:18 says, "Little children, it is the last hour; and as you have heard that the Antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have come." People are saying there will be one specific figure they are expecting. Peter is saying it is ready; it could happen anytime. The Antichrist will first appear, but how many days is it going to take? John says there are already many antichrists. It is a timeline.


25:00 - The Nature of the Last Days: Good and Bad


The last days are a very funny teaching because there are all sorts of ideas people have. We will fully explain that in level five, but I will give you the teasers here. 2 Timothy 3:1 says, "But know this, that in the last days perilous times will come." We are seeing both good and bad stuff said about the last days. The wealthy will be corrupt, more evil will happen, there will be scoffers. But we also see it is the time of the Spirit, a time of good things. We must understand how to balance these realities.


There are both good and bad things happening in the last days. People's conception of the last days is often that only bad things will happen. If you read the Old Testament text, it describes the last days as a time when light is shining brighter, and yet darkness is getting darker at the very same time. The mission and work of the church is to save the world. The people that will not be saved will remain bad and get worse. We must carefully explain the concept of what the gospel is to do. Good will get better, and bad will get worse. There are people who, as time progresses, think everything is just getting worse and never think anything is getting better. As technology progresses, they only see the negative. Yes, things are getting worse in some aspects—more evil is happening—but more people are also getting healed, transformed, and coming out of darkness.


You must have a Christ perspective toward the times. Guard your heart against a purely pessimistic view. The media focuses on the negative, but we can reach more people with the gospel using the same tools. If you only see the glass as half empty, you will just complain and take no action. If you see it as half full, you realize there is something to use and a supply to work with. We need a Christ perspective on the times.


1 Timothy 4:1 says, "Now the Spirit expressly says that in latter times some will depart from the faith, giving heed to deceiving spirits and doctrines of demons." There will be spiritual systems—the Christian faith as an institution—where people will pretend to be of the faith but are not. They will depart from the faith, giving heed to deceiving spirits, speaking lies in hypocrisy, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from foods. You will find ascetic beliefs and practices arising. This warning is about certain people and systems, like the Gnostics in the early church, who depart from the faith. Such departures and false systems are continuous. They are present today in different shapes and forms, presenting themselves as part of the faith but fundamentally denying its core truths. The position the Bible expects us to have when we see institutional actions that are directly erroneous to the foundation of the faith is to recognize that they do not have the Spirit.


The reality of the last days is the time from the presence of Christ and His fulfillment of redemption until the consummation of that redemption. If you understand this basic framework, you realize we are living in the last days. It is not just about a specific future timeline; it is because of the dynamics of God's purpose and plan. Redemption has been fulfilled by Christ, and we are walking toward its consummation.


30:00 - The Order and Pattern of the Last Days


This brings us to the second major point: the order of the last days. We want to outline the timeline in God's purpose and plan to appreciate how to situate the last time. The order of the last days begins this way:


1. The offer of God's purpose, sometimes called creation. This means creation is completed at the point where God offers His purpose to man.
2. The rejection of God's purpose.
3. The sevenfold reign of sin and death.
4. The promise of redemption.
5. The mission toward redemption.
6. The birth and work of the Christ.
7. The increased reign of sin and death, also known as the great tribulation. Whenever the Christ is on the scene in any eschatological pattern, you will see an increase in the reign of sin and death recorded. We see this increase today.
8. The mission toward glorification or consummation.
9. The Day of the Lord.
10. The eternal state.


Minor eschatological patterns will feature a day of the Lord as a time of judgment, and an eternal state as a period of restoration afterward. To understand the grand eschatological timeline, we must look at the major patterns in scripture. The first major eschatological pattern is Genesis 1:1 to Genesis 2:3. The second major pattern is Genesis 2:4 to Genesis 10. The third major pattern is Genesis 11 to Joshua, culminating in the Promised Land. These patterns have always been happening. The reign of God versus the reign of death and darkness always work in this same way. It helps to situate your own place in the last days. Are you aligned as you should be with the happenings in the last days?


The entire distance until the consummation of the Christ is the last days. This timeline is what is scripturally defined as the last days. It is repeatedly said, and there is no room found for talking about the last days as only a future event. Every time we read of the last days, it was a time present to the believer because the Christ had come. We are going to see patterns of the last days before the Christ came, where different "christs"—people who played the roles of deliverers, saviors, judges, and anointed leaders—functioned in similar patterns. But now we are living in the actual last days, where the Christ has come, fulfilled redemption, and a pattern is playing out until the consummation. The major thing you need to understand is that this pattern has been fulfilled and it can happen at any time. It is up to God when He considers His purpose and plan fulfilled across all nations and generations.


35:00 - The Millennium and the Sevenfold Reign of Sin and Death


The only way we can explain the concept of the millennium, the way John used it, is from the available text of scripture. Psalm 90 is a prayer of Moses, the man of God. Genesis is Moses' rendition of God's revelation to him. In Psalm 90, he is talking about God's revelation, stating that God has been our dwelling place in all generations. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever He had formed the earth and the world, from everlasting to everlasting, He is God. He turns man to destruction and says, "Return, O children of men." For a thousand years in His sight are like yesterday when it is past, and like a watch in the night. Moses uses the idea of a thousand years being like a day to God. Peter takes that idea in 2 Peter 3 in his eschatological discussions, taking a text from Moses who was teaching eschatology as well. What Moses thought about days was the concept of six days leading to a seventh day of rest. If Peter is using that text in that manner, it is not unfounded that he is using it to frame the eschatological timeline.


The early church understood this. The six days, which represents the time from when the image of God arrives to His mandate of fruitfulness and multiplication, is seen as 6,000 years. This concept of 6,000 years is part of Jewish numerology and early Christian thought—a figurative teaching appreciating the sixth day as a thousand years based on Moses' teaching. The image of God in Genesis 1 on the sixth day is God Himself becoming a man first, multiplying Himself afterward. That is the thousand years when we reign with Christ—the millennium.


We see the eschatological pattern in Genesis 2. Man was offered God's purpose (the tree of life). He rejected it. Immediately, there was the reign of sin and death. This reign includes the spiritual authority of sin and death, mortality and human suffering, the corruption of matter (natural disasters), and a spiritual worship order contrary to God. There is also a governmental order—the beast—and an economic order with worldly, exploitative tendencies, culminating in a corrupted moral and social order. These seven elements represent the reign of sin and death. Whenever you see the reign of sin and death, you see these elements.


There is the promise of redemption, and direct fulfillment in Noah, the grand fulfillment in Christ. The increase in the reign of sin and death happens when the Christ figure is on the scene. Today, principalities and powers work in tandem; the church's role is to mitigate against these systems. We are not voting someone in to completely fix it; the natural and governmental systems will always carry elements of the beast. The church is the salt and the light combating that system.


We must live with the consciousness that we are in the last days, until the consummation of Christ. We should live with the awareness that Christ can come at any time, but we must pursue the mission faithfully. We do not idly wait for Him; we do the work, knowing He can return at any moment. That is the faithful servant carrying out the Master's will. We appreciate the pattern of the last days, foreshadowed in the Old Testament, explained in the Epistles, and comprehensively detailed in Revelation. We must know our role in the last days. In level three, we will do more detailed explanations on the last days, but I hope for now you have understood when the last days are, and the pattern of the last days. We must align with the Christ mission.


track 11
The New Creation


The new creation is the most important teaching in the sense that it is the core of the doctrine of Christ. I often say that every other part of the teaching is to make us sure that the faith of Christ is true, so that we can focus on the new creation for our growth and walk. Every other part of the teaching of the doctrine of Christ is to give us certainty, to make us sure it's true, and stability. When you lack certainty and stability, if someone challenges your worldview or your position, you start to doubt entirely. You start to have anxiety, wondering if you are really sure you are right. But once you have been grounded in the truth, you have certainty and stability. Then you can focus on what to do with all that you now know, which is to grow and to walk. That is precisely what the new creation is about.


It is for this reason that the entirety of level four in the Pleroma Perfecting Course is about the new creation. It is the big deal in doctrine. You can never go wrong teaching the new creation. I often say you can never overemphasize the new creation. How could you? It is the very thing that makes for our walk. The Pleroma Perfecting Course is designed to perfect you to fulfill God's purpose. We have said that there is God's purpose for our life we are meant to fulfill, but we need to grow to fulfill that purpose. What we are growing in exactly to fulfill God's purpose is the reality of the new creation.


After you are saved, you have entered into God's purpose. The Lord Jesus said you need discipleship. He described that discipleship generally in Luke 6:40 as something that perfects you to be as the master. By the time we get to Ephesians 4, Paul picks that same word that the Lord used—perfecting—and says Jesus gave the leaders of the church to perfect you so that you are going to arrive at the unity of the faith, the knowledge of the Son of God, a perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. You arrive at where He wants you to get to in knowledge. He gave leaders of the church to bring you to the place that He wants you to be in knowledge.


You are saved, you are in God's purpose. What you need is perfecting that will bring about the growth that will cause you to fulfill that purpose. That perfecting or discipleship requires knowledge, but you also need the response of faith or faith stand that will now mature you to fulfill God's purpose for your life. Let's go to Ephesians 4 and see the nature of the emphasis Paul makes to show you what will be the most emphatic part of the teaching. Anything less than 50% on the new creation is not a good diet. If you learn any other thing and you don't learn who you are in Christ, you are not going to walk in anything. You will just have your head full of knowledge, certain, but you are not walking in anything.


Ephesians 4 says in verse 13 that we are to come to the unity of the faith, which is knowledge, the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, which is the growth as a result of your response of faith to the knowledge, then the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Again, growth. Verse 14 says that we should no longer be children, tossed to and fro by every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, in the cunning craftiness of deceitful plotting. Verse 14 seems to be focused on certainty and stability. I don't want anybody to tell you something that will make you shaken. This is where the value of every other area in the doctrine is. If someone challenges you on how you know the Bible is correct, you are easily shaken because you have not been well-taught the unity of the faith to make you confident. If someone challenges you on whether there is a God, for the first time you wonder what is going on. They could challenge you on about anything down the entire spectrum of the doctrine. Are you rock solid enough to be immovable?


Verse 15 doesn't talk about that idea of certainty and stability. Verse 15 rather says, "But speaking the truth in love, may grow up in all things into Him." This one is about growth. The growth is into Christ in all things who is the head. This is about the new creation. We are growing up into Christ in all things who is the head. If you are in doubt that it is about the new creation, look at Ephesians 4:20. The leaders are to speak the truth in love so we will grow up into Him. Verse 20 says, "But you have not so learned Christ, if indeed you have heard Him and have been taught by Him, as the truth is in Jesus, that you put off, concerning your former conduct, the old man which grows corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and that you put on the new man which was created according to God, in true righteousness and holiness."


The teaching is on the new creation. The teaching that will cause you to grow into Christ is on the new creation. If you read Ephesians 4:20-24, you might almost think, is that the only thing we have to teach in church? Because it is the end goal and emphasis of the church teaching. The unity of the faith is not just that, but because this reality of the new creation is the end goal and emphasis of the church teaching, that's why you see it spoken of in that manner. Without any doubt, the new creation is the major teaching of scripture that we should know.
05:00 - Defining the New Creation
The first thing we are going to look at is an introduction to the new creation. The statement I want to make is that the new creation is God's purpose fulfilled via redemption. What we are calling the new creation is God's purpose. If there wasn't sin, we wouldn't call the new creation "new creation." We would have spoken of the fact that we are sons of God without that dynamic of sin, death, and darkness, even though there might be a conceptual recognition of it. When we talk about the new creation, it is from the reality of sin, death, and darkness that we have come to God's purpose as new, from something else that is the old.


The new creation is God's purpose fulfilled via redemption. The moment you say "I'm a new creation," you are admitting an old reality that you no longer are. Why do you need the admission of that? Because there is still a contention about it on your mind. You can't just say, "I'm a son of God." As you say "I'm a new creation," you are making a denial: I'm no longer that, I am this. You can't say "I'm a son of God" in addition to something else. It must be "I'm a new creation," which is "I'm no longer this, I'm just this." It is God's purpose fulfilled via redemption.


That's what makes it all the more important. We have to remind ourselves what God's purpose is. We have seen from Ephesians 1:9 and Ephesians 1:5, God's purpose is sonship. What does sonship mean? Romans 8:15-17 shows that sonship means we are God's child and God's heirs. This is the new creation. One who is God's child and God's heir, but that used to be something else. That is why the best way to describe God's purpose today is to use that term "new creation," because you are summing up what we were that we no longer are and what we are now. It is an awesome confession. You can say "I'm a son of God, I'm a child of God, I'm an heir of God, I'm light." It's beautiful. But when you say "I'm a new creation," you have had a thorough capture of who you are in the way that God expects you to. I am not darkness. I am not death. I am not sin. I'm not in the flesh. I am this. In that single statement, you have made a denial and you have made an acknowledgment.


That reality of sonship, which was presented in Genesis 2 as life, is what the new creation is. Romans 6:4 says that by the resurrection of Jesus, we have entered into the newness of life. It is the same life that was being presented to man. 1 John 3:14 says that we have passed from death to life. We know this because we love the brethren. Ephesians 5 says you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light. We should not walk in darkness. That light that was spoken of in Genesis 1, 2, and 3, that was lost, bringing in darkness, that was restored—"let there be light"—is who we are now. It's what God wanted. It's His purpose. Every depiction of God's purpose running through the entire scripture is now fulfilled via redemption in what we can now awesomely label as the new creation. It means I'm not this, I'm that. It means I'm not darkness, I'm light. It means I'm not death, I'm life. I'm not sin, I'm righteous. I'm not flesh, I'm spirit. I'm talking about flesh the nature of the old man. I am spirit, the spirit of God, the reality of the new man. It's so central.
10:00 - Scriptural Descriptions of the New Creation
Without going back to look for what this unity of the faith is, you already know this is a major part of the doctrine. When you go back to the outline of doctrine Paul gave us, you will see it all through that outline. The very first statement in the outline of the doctrine was about the new creation: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ." The very first thing he is stating, to start his discussion, to start his examination of the doctrine, is that we are grateful that we are like this. It all began with God having a purpose before time. It began with the new creation.


The exploration continues with acknowledgment of the new creation at every juncture. We have redemption, we are accepted in the beloved, we have obtained an inheritance, until he eventually says we have been sealed with the Spirit. It is by the Spirit that we are new creations. Having the Spirit, we have all that God intends for us to have in our walk with Him. The new creation is the most emphatic truth of Christian doctrine. This reality of the new creation is God's purpose fulfilled via redemption.


When you get to level five on the new creation, there is so much that we are going to say. We will take you patiently through every description of the new creation in the Old Testament text all the way to the new. The new creation is light, is life, is blessed, is circumcised, is the true Israel. In the New Testament, we eventually summed it up, after looking at all the texts, into forty-eight descriptions. I think in the Old Testament, we summed it up into twelve. It has a new heart. Looking at the different descriptions here and there of the new creation, we have done that just by saying it is God's purpose fulfilled via redemption. You are a son of God, you are a child of God, you are an heir of God, you have God's nature, you are a partaker of the divine nature. You have the fullness of divinity. Colossians 2:9-10 says, "For in Him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and you are complete in Him." We have the fullness of divinity. 2 Peter 1:4 says we are partakers of the divine nature. 1 Corinthians 6:17 says we are one spirit with the Lord.
15:00 - Our Status, Character, and Abilities
When we speak about the new creation, in appreciating the reality of the new creation, there are several texts upon which we can establish the preference of the description "new creation" for this purpose of God fulfilled via redemption. Ephesians 4 is one. We should put off the old, put on the new. Describing this our new reality as new creation is a preference established from the manner of explanation we find from the apostles. The clearest text on this would be 2 Corinthians 5:17. The context of this particular text helps us to see who we are as new creations in a very beautiful way. "Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new."


If anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. All things have passed away. They are not passing. All things have become new. What are they now as new? Verse 18 says, "Now all things are of God." As new, they are all of God, they are divine. As old, what were they? They were of sin, of flesh, of death, of darkness. As new, they are now of light, of life, of righteousness, of goodness, of God, of divinity. All things have become new, and all things are of God, who has reconciled us to Himself.


The reason I wanted us to come to this text is first to read the verse that is the pretext. "Therefore, from now on, we regard no one according to the flesh. Even though we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know Him thus no longer." What does it mean we regard no one according to the flesh? There is a natural way of thinking about people. He said even when Jesus our Lord was around, we regarded Him in such a natural way as well. But he says our reasoning now has changed in the light of redemption in Christ. We regard people according to what He wants in His purpose, or according to what He has fulfilled of His purpose. We are not regarding them according to the flesh.


When we regard people according to the flesh, for example, someone sees me and says, "That guy is a male." He has not said that guy is a new creation. He is not thinking about me from the spiritual standpoint. He is thinking about me from the natural standpoint. He might never even say I'm a new creation. There is no such means of description in his own worldview. He will say that guy is a male, that guy is tall, that guy is African, European, or American. He will say that guy is a billionaire. He could talk about my class, my race, my ethnicity, my gender. He is judging from a natural standpoint. He's saying we believers have learned not to just judge from the natural standpoint anymore. We don't judge people from the flesh. That's not our spectrum of judgment as believers primarily. Of course, there will be a place for that naturally. We consider people from the standpoint of the spirit. This person is a new creation. Our mode of judgment is not primarily in the flesh, in the natural. We are not judging by race, gender, and class primarily; we are judging spiritually, the status of people spiritually, their nature spiritually. This requires an understanding of the dual reality of humanity. Every human has a natural reality and a spiritual reality. That is why your judgment might stop with the natural, even though your judgment ought to be spiritual.
20:00 - The Three Categories of the New Creation
Typically, someone that is not in the faith of Christ has no basis for judging people spiritually. We are just all human beings, there's nothing much to it. By virtue of our worldview via redemption in Christ, our judgment of people cannot just be natural. It should be primarily spiritual. We must understand that people are natural and spiritual, material or physical and metaphysical. 2 Corinthians 4:16 gives us a basis for that submission. "Therefore we do not lose heart. Even though our outward man is perishing, yet the inward man is being renewed day by day."


Each of us has an outward man and an inward man. Those of us who are born again, our outward man, like others, is yet perishing, but our inward man is renewed day by day. The idea is just that the way our outward man is perishing as time is counting, our inward man is not growing old as time is counting. It is staying new as time counts. It remains unchanging as time passes. Our inward man is renewed day by day. The understanding of the new creation is built on the understanding of the dual reality of humanity. There is an outward man and there is an inward man. Leading up to what he said, he had established that. You cannot have a proper grasp of the new creation without this in view.


At the point you got saved, if you are male or female, African, Asian, European, or American, your status does not change at the point of salvation. It can change after, for good or bad. Nothing changes at that instance, but he is saying everything changed at that instance in another domain. Nothing changed at that instance in the natural domain, your outward man. But everything changed at that instance in the other domain, your inward man. We can say one thing changed about your outward man: it became owned by God and will be redeemed at the end. The status changed. Nothing has changed other than that, but everything has changed on another plane, on another level, on the metaphysical plane, on the spiritual one, about your inward man.


Everything changed when you believed the gospel. When you became in Christ, the spirit of God put us into Christ at the instance of faith. At that point where you are now in Christ, by faith in Christ, everything changed about your inward man. This is the reality of the new creation. The reality of the new creation is not predicated on any change in the natural. It is about everything that changed in the spiritual because of your faith in Christ.


Having established the new creation in this manner, what are the realities about us as new creations that have since changed because of our faith in Christ? What is the reality of that inward man that we now have that is fused with God's Spirit? Our spirit, our inward man, is now one spirit with the Lord. That's what has changed. We no longer have the spirit of bondage again to fear. Our spirit is no longer in subjection to sin and death and darkness and evil. Our spirit is now entirely under the reign of God's light, fused with His own Spirit.


What is it that is the reality of this new man? What is it that is the reality of our spirit? There are three categories, or three things to look at when we speak about the reality of the new creation. When you become a new creation, we can classify the reality of who we are into three categories. The first is our status. The second is our character. The third is our abilities. We can look at the reality of the new creation in these three areas.
25:00 - Status of the New Creation: Freed from Sin, Children of God
What is our status? The first thing in our status is that we are free from sin. Under this, we talk about the reality of the forgiveness of sins, of no condemnation. We are entirely free from sin. The new creation has a new status. There is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. If you check the man, the man is not damnable anymore. John 5:24 says, "He who hears My word and believes in Him who sent Me has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment, but has passed from death into life." The status of that man is that he can never be judged to condemnation. He will be judged for his works unto rewards, but he can never be judged unto condemnation. That man is free from condemnation, free from any such demands and holds of judgment completely. That is the status of the man.


The second thing in the status of that man that is a new creation is that he is a child of God. We talk about the reality of our fellowship with the Father. One of the unfortunate ways people think about being children of God is that they say we are adopted children of God. This comes from the use of "adoption" that we find in scripture, particularly in the KJV, which is an unfortunate translation of the word "sonship." It speaks to the positioning as an heir, but it is not addressing particularly how you were born or produced. Paul makes it clear that our production is from God. He gave us His Spirit; we are born of Him. We are born of God. We are actual children of God.


Someone might say, "That's my child," because they adopted the person and accept them with all goodwill, loving the person as their very own. But as beautiful as that is, biologically, that is not their child. By nature, they don't share biology. We are children of God by nature. When we speak about our status, we must understand that we are children of God. We can fellowship with Him on terms of familiarity. It's always difficult to have that level of familiarity with someone that is not your biological child raised by you. There is usually sometimes a lingering thought of inadequacy or unworthiness that can be there. This does not happen in our relationship with God. There is no thought of, "I know He has clothed me, but..." while the person is struggling with trauma, dealing with repressed emotions. That doesn't happen in our relationship with the Father. We are genuinely, naturally children of God. The self-existent Creator, Father God, is our actual Father.


We are free from sin, we are children of God. The third thing in our status is we have authority over darkness.
30:00 - Believer's Authority and the Character of the New Creation
That is the devil and his cohorts. That is the third thing in our status. When you get to level five, this is the reality of the believer's authority. It's one of the primary things to know. When you know about the forgiveness of sins as a new creation, your status as forgiven without condemnation. When you know about the fellowship you now have with the Father, you are His child, called to fellowship with Him. You should know about the authority of the believer.


One of the things that I lament about the way some people have presented God's word is how they have whittled down the authority of the believer. I am endeavoring to become more ecumenical across traditions that are non-Pentecostal and charismatic, and even within the Pentecostal and charismatic arm of Christianity. Sometimes you can see all kinds of positions that people hold. Someone will preach a teaching, and people are on the edge of their seats, literally crying, because of how he was explaining the devil. He was warning them not to joke with Satan. The presentation had already done a lot of damage. The devil does a lot of bad stuff, but only because you have been permitting it. After everything he has said, the expected conclusion should be, "And all this has happened by the devil because you have been allowing it, and the day you say 'no more,' he does not..."


He has gripped them with fear, then slaps them to wake up, saying, "It's your fault, because you are the one told to resist the devil, and he will flee from you." Not that he will negotiate with you. What stubbornness does he have when we are told we have authority to trample upon serpents and scorpions over all the power of the enemy? What business do we have with any such stubbornness? Our duty is to stay in the believer's authority, to stand on it. Why make us so weak and make him so strong? He is a defeated foe. The Bible is loud about it. He is a defeated foe that is simply to be resisted. Give no place to the devil. It didn't say he's going to struggle and mess with you. That was never the attitude.


In supplication, which is usually in ministry over the lives of people, there is a need for the supply of power for preservation, for salvation, for growth. Not for the devil messing around with you. No way. You have the believer's authority. This is the reality of the new creation. You have authority over darkness. These are the foundational truths about the new creation. No condemnation is foundational. Boldness to relate with the Father as a child of God is foundational. Believer's authority is foundational. Status is status; stand there. That's your status, the reality of the new creation. I get annoyed when I see people glorifying the devil. I get annoyed because I know what he can do. It's a lie that he can't do anything; he can. The main reason he can is usually that preachers fuel what he does. The preaching almost caused me a problem once, and it was very serious. I was praying, asking God to help me because the principalities were trying to stop me. Then I read a book and realized I didn't have any business fighting him. I was seated far above him. I was angry. People's minds have been captured for the devil by people glorifying the devil.
35:00 - The New Creation Character and Abilities
Instead of freeing them, you keep that mindset and tell them to fight him with the mind that he is really strong. You are supposed to dismantle that stronghold. You should pray for them, that whatever is affecting this person is a stronghold.


We must recognize our character. We have the very nature of God when it comes to our character. We recognize love as the primary reality of that nature, and righteousness. Our character focuses on love, forgiveness, and righteousness. You forgive; that's how you are. You are natured to forgive. You are the righteousness of God. You are natured to forgive.


What about our abilities in Christ? We have utterance, revelation, and power. These are the gifts of the Holy Ghost. It is our character and nature to forgive anybody. Someone abused you—it's your nature and character as a believer to forgive. Don't waste your mental space on anyone. You have limited mental energy. Not forgiving someone requires consistent mental energy; every time you remember, you recall you are not forgiving them. You are burning your mental space. I don't have time or space to be offended. Why would I be offended? The reason I don't get offended is that I used to have compassion for people I should be offended at. I realized that if they did something to me, it means something happened to their mind that made them like that. It's a problem they are dealing with. Why are they acting like this? Love, forgiveness, and righteousness—that is our character.
40:00 - The Growth of the New Creation
The abilities we have are utterance, revelation, and power.


The growth of the new creation is the next thing. The growth of the new creation pertains to the mind. The growth of the new creation is not a function of your spirit. The kind of thinking that visualizes your "spirit man" as looking skinny is completely wrong. Our spirits are already one with the Lord. The growth of the new creation is entirely a function of the mind. All of us have the same spirit with God. The Spirit we have is the Spirit God gave us, fused with our spirit. They are inseparable now, fused as one reality. There is the Spirit as a person, but in the reality of the Spirit's indwelling, there is no separation of the Spirit and our spirit in that state. We are talking about a fused, inseparable reality.


The growth of the new creation pertains to the mind. Ephesians 4:17-19 makes that clear. The mind has different parts. We have explained that there are seven parts of the mind of man that you must be aware of in appreciating growth: the consideration space, free will, memory, conviction bank (what you agree with), and the consciousness bank (what you are conscious of). You can agree with something and not be as conscious of it. The consciousness of something else is stronger, even though your conviction is settled. There is also emotion and conscience.


The major things to note are consideration, conviction, and consciousness. The mind is where growth happens. When you are told to be transformed by the renewing of your mind, what makes you grow to walk is your mind. Our spirits are exactly the same, fused with God's Spirit. What causes growth in your mind is what you are considering. Of all the things you consider, you don't agree with all of them. Someone can say something, and you reject it as nonsense. It enters your mind, your memory, but not your conviction. We considered other belief systems before getting saved, but we do not agree with them. We have the knowledge of them in our memory bank, but they are not in our conviction. Our free will considered other things and accepted the truth, leading to conviction. If care is not taken, those things that pass through consideration and go to memory might become your consciousness if you do not deliberately use your free will to make the truth of God's word your consciousness, which is faith. You must be full of faith about the realities of Christ. When you say you are growing in your mind, the first thing is conviction—knowledge of God's word that you agree with. The second thing is consciousness.
45:00 - The Operations and Natural/Spiritual Assignments
This requires conviction of knowledge first, then growth happens by the faith stand or consciousness of that knowledge. Growth requires conviction of knowledge first, then growth happens by faith or consciousness of that knowledge. You must be fully aware of, convinced about, and conscious of who you are.


The operation of the new creation is the detailed explanation of how the new creation does love, spelled out. This is how he plays out humility, longsuffering, patience. This is how he works in the Spirit, how he deals with habits and addictions. This is the operation of the new creation. It is about taking steps and how we walk. When you see that this is how you do things by nature, you make that your consciousness, producing your actual doing of those things. At the level of the walk, we are not just looking at the reality of these things, but the very operations—the steps that pertain to them. Then we look at how the new creation handles marital matters and relationships. This is what honor is, this is what loyalty is. With that, you understand the walk of the new creation, the operations.


We get to the gifts of the Spirit and see how they work. You start to know what to expect. The power of God, when ministered by words, laying on of hands, or mediums, makes blind eyes open, deaf ears unstop, causes the dumb to speak, heals maimed bodies, and raises the dead. You realize that revelation gifts find out personal details about people, or assignments—whether what they are doing or what they should be doing. It finds out about needs of deliverance or provision. If we are not there to inquire, we might miss opportunities, but we must be there in regular use of them. You understand the work of the new creation. You look at it, you inquire.


The natural assignment of the new creation is what God has called the new creation to do in God's intention before sin, and even after redemption, it remains part of our lot. Then there is the spiritual assignment of the new creation, which is the ministry of the new creation. This is often neglected because you are not naturally disposed by survival to engage in it. You must be taught and trained with a heart of obedience, compassion, and fervency to pursue your spiritual assignment.


Finally, there is the hope of the new creation, which is the glorification of his body and his life in the new heavens and the new earth. The new creation is the high point of Christian doctrine and Bible teaching. You must be completely baptized in the knowledge and consciousness of the new creation.